reproduction in the post-1974 generations, who depend upon collective memory alone for 
reconstructing the trauma. We argue that the “1974” cultural trauma commemorated in the 
suffering caused by the island’s forced division has left indelible marks on the Greek Cypriot 
identity but at the same time, it has become the only lens through which Greek Cypriots refract 
their current concerns and future aspirations. 
 
Constructing “1974” as Cultural Drama 

As a carrier group, the collectivity of Greek Cypriots identifies “1974” as the affliction 
that permanently stigmatized their identity. Beyond the violence and deaths, the trauma of 1974 
is interpreted as the drama of being a Greek Cypriot in the various permutations of an unstable 
national identity—Greek Cypriot, Cypriot, Turkish Cypriot—and the categorical uncertainty 
they ensue. On the one hand, 1974 emphasized the Greekness of the Greek Cypriot label through 
the perennial and largely mythologized Greek/Turkish opposition. On the other hand, it 
implicitly forced Greek Cypriots to focus on the Cypriotness of their identity by permanently 
giving up on the idea of union with Greece (enosis) and emphasizing instead the integrity and 
unity of the Republic of Cyprus which includes both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots. The 
nature of the pain is routinely expressed as the pain of loss of ancestral homes (villages and 
family properties) and the uprooting caused by the forceful population movement of some 
180,000 Greek Cypriots. Greek Cypriots relate the victims of the trauma to a wider audience by 
appealing to the violation of rights such as the right to property and the right of return. Given that 
refugees and relatives of missing or ‘disappeared’ persons are international categories, the 
cultural trauma of 1974 is constructed to be relatable at the human, not simply the ethnic level. 
The attribution of responsibility begins with locating Turkey as the state responsible for a 
military intervention that went beyond its constitutional right to protect Turkish Cypriots and 
instead occupied the northern part of the Republic of Cyprus. 

This paper does not detail the historical and political developments that led to the 
construction of “1974” as a cultural trauma for Greek Cypriots, nor is our discussion is going 
to address the successful employment of the trauma narrative in various international 
institutional arenas—such as the UN, world press, the EU—in order to have this narrative 
gain wide international acceptance and nearly global legitimacy. Our aim is to examine its 
construction within the Greek Cypriot community itself, focusing in particular on everyday 
practices as well as institutional rituals and ceremonies that sustain its emotional impact for 
the past 35 years. Therefore, perhaps the first issue that needs to be tackled with regarding 
the applicability of cultural trauma theory in a case of inter-communal ethnic conflict such as 
Cyprus is to address the moral relativism implicit in the multitude of accounts that stress the 
extent to which each side’s national narrative is implicated in the reproduction of memories 
(for example, Papadakis, 2003, 1998, 1993; Anastasiou, 2002; Cockburn, 2004; Cassia, 
2006). That is, Greek Cypriots’ suffering in the context of the 1974 invasion is traditionally 
contrasted to the inter-communal fights of 1963-64 and the suffering of Turkish Cypriots 
who were isolated into ethnic enclaves until the 1974 invasion when they resettled in the 
territory that was self-declared as the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) in 1983. 
In fact, to the extent that cultural trauma is a key element in a group’s master narrative its 
articulation is intertwined with the master narrative itself (Alexander, 2004). Narrativization 
itself then carries important repercussions for constructing a view of history, of group 
conflict and of the Other that can lead to the politics of mutual suspicion and to an increase in 
the possibility of future conflict (Rydgren, 2007). In essence such interpretations adopt an 

 

207

instrumentalist view of culture, whereby symbolic struggles are merely an extension of real 
world power conflicts (Bourdieu, 1989; 1990). 

From our viewpoint, however culture is constitutive and not simply instrumental to social 
life – and as such, there is simply no strict counterpart of “1974” in the experience of the Turkish 
Cypriot community. That should not be misleadingly interpreted as a negation of their suffering. 
It is a mere extension of the gradual nature of inter-communal separation for the Turkish 
Cypriots (versus its abrupt and sudden nature for the Greek Cypriots). It is also an extension of 
the fact that the establishment and commemorative rituals of the post-1983 TRNC cannot be 
viewed in strict correspondence to the post-1974 Republic of Cyprus. This is because of the 
different demographic developments in the post-1974 Greek and Turkish parts of the island: 
While in the Greek-Cypriot controlled Republic of Cyprus nativism has played a major role in 
determining citizenship, in the Turkish-Cypriot controlled TRNC more than 160,000 Turks from 
mainland Turkey were resettled, altering the demographic composition of its citizens193. To 
understand the specificity of cultural trauma, it is necessary to point out that, just like numerous 
other post-colonial societies, Cyprus is characterized by strong nativism (Anderson, 1991). 
Colonially constructed categories of “native Cypriots” operated as a means of re-inscribing the 
peasants’ connections with their kinship groups – which to this date remain the main reference 
group among the island’s natives – as well as with their original village (Loizos, 1975, 1981; 
Loizos and Papataxiarchis, 1991; Attalides, 1976). 

Finally, the major reason for applying cultural trauma theory in the case of “1974” is that 
Greek Cypriots did not have to interpret this event as cultural trauma – but as the inevitable 
consequence of the application of Greek and Turkish nationalist claims over the island. Dual 
partition was a possible outcome of the Cyprus issue even before the establishment of the 
Republic of Cyprus in 1960, and therefore in theory it would have been possible to interpret 
“1974” as the natural conclusion of this process. Therefore, our approach seeks to 
problematize “1974” and to view its construction as a process – and not as the result of a 
single event. Needless to say, the constructed nature of cultural trauma does not imply its 
fictionality—in the sense of the fantastic or imagined—neither does it foreclose the notion of 
an event that predictably results in pain and suffering. It emphasizes, however, the 
importance of attending to the socially mediated processes that translate suffering into a 
collective cultural trauma, the proportions of which extend beyond individual experience.  
This means that suffering which is not personally experienced can be deeply traumatizing for 
the next generation or that violence and death can be interpreted as heroic and triumphant 
instead of traumatic. In the case of Cyprus, 1974 is not a cultural trauma for Turkish Cypriots 
who were also displaced from their towns and villages in the southern part of the island and 
relocated in the northern part of the island. Instead, the sense of displacement and relocation 
has given birth to a cultural trauma felt not only by those Greek Cypriots who personally 
experienced the events, but, as we shall show, even for Greek Cypriots born into families of 
internally displaced persons194 (referred to in Greek as “refugee” families [prosfyges]). From 

                                                 
193 According to the Republic of Cyprus Press and Information Office (PIO) the Turkish Cypriot population is 

estimated at 88,100 and settlers from Turkey at 162,000 (more information at 
http://www.moi.gov.cy/moi/pio/pio.nsf/a_problem_en/a_problem_en?OpenDocument). The official position of 
the TRNC does not differentiate between native Turkish Cypriots and settlers from Turkey (more information at 
http://www.trncinfo.com/eng/index.htm). 

194 According to the 1951 Geneva Convention and the 1967 Protocol those not forced to leave their country are 

described as ‘internally displaced’ people and not refugees. Given that the UNHCR describes their condition as a 

 

208

a Greek Cypriot perspective, Turkish Cypriots could have identified with the trauma of 1974 
because they were also displaced and suffered losses. Turkish Cypriot narratives, however, 
follow a different timeline that emphasizes the suffering caused in the 1963-64 inter-
communal conflict that confined them in enclaves under constant fear of persecution 
(Papadakis, 2003; Bryant, 2008).  
 To understand this development, “1974” must be analyzed as a “horrendous event” 
(Alexander, 2004a) that stands as a rupture in time or, in the president’s opening quote, as an 
event that overturned the “smooth course of time”. Cultural traumas treat the painful 
historical event as a happening ‘out-of-time’ (Alexander, 2004b: 226). That suggests the 
trauma’s unpredictable character as well as the inability to view the event as part of the 
ordinary course of time. For Greek Cypriots, the break from ordinary time and the 
rootlessness of their experience are two of the main factors that contributed to looking upon 
the events of 1974 as a cultural trauma. Both of these are directly attributed to forced 
relocation and a perceived break with tradition. We begin, therefore, by detailing the two 
major characteristics of the “1974” cultural trauma: the experience of uprootedness and the 
vision of a mythical day of return. 

The metaphor of uprootedness is pervasive in the refugees’ narratives of loss, denoting 
both the literal supplantation of a largely rural and agrarian population, as well as the centrality 
of the land in configuring identity (Loizos, 1981). As Bryant (2002) has argued, kinship with the 
land partakes of religious imagery in Cyprus and it represents another element of the 
metaphorical familial connections of nationalism that naturalize the relationship between the 
people and the nation. However, 1974 did not simply deprive refugees from homes, fields and 
orange groves; it also unsettled deep-seated cultural constructions of time and continuity that are 
uniquely exemplified in the agrarian rhythms of the land. This rupture in time, therefore, was 
both historical and cultural, with the use of chronology advancing the traumatic event into a 
symbol while signifying its magnitude in relation to the post-1974 epoch. Although we realize 
that 1974 does not carry the same international cultural capital as 9/11, our purposeful use of it in 
the title echoes its cultural significance in constructing a horrendous event that was beyond 
comparison with any other disastrous event in the island’s history. In turn, Greek Cypriot 
narratives foster a nostalgic view toward the pre-modern pre-1974 status quo that leads to a 
nearly messianic expectation of restoring the lost grace of that era as part of the future. As Bryant 
(2008) notes, this is a point of divergence between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot readings 
of the past: while for Turkish Cypriot readings history reached a turning point in 1974, for Greek 
Cypriot readings, history remains to achieve its closure in the future – as part of a final 
settlement of the Cyprus issue.  

The question of the unpredictability of 1974 as a horrendous event is also important in 
constructing it as cultural trauma. On the one hand, Greek Cypriot narratives of history often 
present 1974 as the epitome of the island’s inescapable destiny in being successively occupied by 
different peoples (Christou, 2007). On the other hand, the question of responsibility or the issue 
of ‘who started it’ (see Smelser, 2004) can expose deep ideological rifts in the Greek Cypriot 
                                                                                                                                                             

‘refugee-like situation’ (see Zetter, 1994) the term refugee—along with its connotations of social status and 
identity—has prevailed in Greek discourse. The Greek Cypriot refugees’ plight has been aptly documented – 
including the documentary “Attilas 1974” by internationally renowned director Mihalis Kakogiannis, a native of 
Cyprus.  

 

 

209

political landscape (Mavratsas, 1997; Papadakis, 1993; 1998). But in dominant commemorations 
of 1974, events are presented as a shock, as something that could not have been predicted or 
contained. Thus, the brutality of the uprootedness is established in its departure from the normal 
course of history, regardless of the political events that could have served as a warning. The 
president’s reference to the ‘treacherous coup’ that preceded the Turkish invasion alludes to a 
controversial causality in which the military coup that overthrew the Greek government was 
linked to Greek Cypriot extremists’ attempt against the Cyprus president’s life which then 
precipitated the invasion events.  

 Furthermore, the longing for the day of return functions as a response to the suffering 
caused by the sudden uprooting and maintains a positive vision for the future. Despite tangible 
signs of adaptation in their new social and economic structures of exile, aided not only by 
various social provisions such as housing and health care but also by a largely supportive 
population of co-ethnics in the south, Greek Cypriot refugees have always maintained the hope 
that one day they will be allowed to return just as they were unexpectedly forced to leave (Loizos 
and Constantinou, 2007). Even after decades of ‘protracted exile’ this deep belief in the ‘myth of 
return’ (Zetter, 1999) is guided by a sense of inconceivable injustice perpetrated upon them and a 
metaphysical faith in divine justice. 

For example, the Rotary Club of Nicosia – Salamis, one of the Rotary clubs of the island 

founded by internally displaced professionals from the city of Famagusta (currently in the 
occupied part) has enshrined the longing for a day of return in the prayer that precedes each club 
meeting:  
 

Oh God, our Lord, 
We  pray  you  bless  this  meeting  and  strengthen  us  in  our  deeds  of  love  and 
benevolence. Also, our Lord, we ask you to deliver speedily our beloved country 
Cyprus  from  the  sufferings  of  foreign  aggression  and  grant  that  its  indigenous 
population live in peace and security, praising thy holy name.195 
 

This yearning for the day of return is also evident in the discursive shifts in the post-1974 Greek 
Cypriot political rhetoric. Since the early 19th century Greek Cypriots had expressed a desire for 
enosis (union with Greece) which later prompted the corresponding Turkish Cypriot demand for 
taksim (partition) of the island. After 1974, however, the enosis demand was abandoned and any 
lingering sentiments for enosis that had been officially or unofficially expressed by Greek 
Cypriots were effectively silenced (Mavratsas, 1996, 1997; Attalides, 1979; Markides, 1977; 
Stamatakis, 1991). This was followed by the vision of a unified island where Greek Cypriots and 
Turkish Cypriots would live in harmony. However, this supposedly harmonic pre-1974 reality 
clearly differs from the Turkish Cypriot experience which was punctuated by isolation. 
Regardless, Greek Cypriots abandoned the enosis vision in order to construct this mythical day 
of return that will heal the “1974” cultural trauma. 

Furthermore, this myth of return is galvanized by the idealization of the pre-1974 period 

as the paradise of simple and blissful life (Zetter, 1994, 1999; Dikomitis 2004; Loizos, 1981). 
Greek Cypriot refugees—and, to a certain extend, all Greek Cypriots—describe the occupied 
                                                 
195 http://www.rotary-cyprus.org/~nic-salamis/, retrieved March 25, 2009. The city of Famagusta (Ammochostos in 

Greek) used to be the largest city in pre-1974 Cyprus. Since the invasion, its Greek Cypriot inhabitants were 
displaced mainly to Nicosia, Larnaca and Limassol. The old part of the city was sealed off by the Turkish forces, 
and the city has become a ghost town.  

 

210

areas as the most beautiful, scenic and picturesque part of the island. Just like it is not 
appropriate to speak ill of the dead, Greek Cypriots refrain from saying anything negative about 
the areas under occupation or even remembering negative occasions in those areas; except, of 
course, from the events of 1974. Nothing compares to a refugee’s occupied home: everything 
before 1974 was good, everything after, is bad (Loizos and Constantinou, 2007). This has 
burdened the idea of return with unrealistic expectations. As Zetter (1999: 6) has pointed out: 
“What is mythologized, is what has been left behind and what, it is hoped, return will 
accomplish—the belief that ‘home’, both as a material and symbolic entity, can be restored as it 
was before exile”. 

The mythological status of a ‘day of return’ that would uplift the rootlessness of 

modernity has also contributed to the elevation of those “left behind” (that is, those who did not 
leave their houses in order to move to the southern part of the island) into a special symbolic 
status. These are referred to as “enclaved” [englovismenoi] Greek Cypriots who have become 
emblems of the resistance against uprooting. Their everyday struggle is commended and 
commemorated officially by the state and unofficially in the media and other sites of cultural 
production. Appealing to the European Court of Human Rights, the Republic of Cyprus 
government achieved a vote which condemned Turkey for 14 violations of the European 
Convention of Human rights, 7 of which refer to the living conditions of the “enclaved” Greek 
Cypriots (Cyprus Versus Turkey, application no.25781/94, May 10 2001).   
 
Into the Mundane: Everyday Rituals of “1974”  

Cultural traumas are established with the identification of a horrendous event and 

solidified through commemorative practices that transform the event into personal and collective 
memory. In this section we aim to show how this trauma is experienced through the discursive, 
representational and institutional practices that established the commemoration of those events 
not simply as an annual ritual but as an everyday routine that ritualizes the very act of 
remembering the trauma. In a multitude of sites that range from official ones – such the Republic 
of Cyprus’ educational system or state legislation– to unofficial ones – such as the refugee 
associations and kinship groups – the trauma of 1974 has been constructed not as a historical 
event but as a present day trauma that derives its urgency from an unresolved political problem.  

The Greek Cypriot educational system has significantly contributed to the ritualization 

and routinization of “1974” through the cross-curricular goal of the “I don’t forget” (Den 
Ksechno) objective. The slogan “I don’t forget” was originally created by writer and advertising 
director Nikos Dimou, on the very day of the Turkish military intervention in 1974. Succinct and 
solemn, and accompanied by a visual image of a bleeding island (see image below), it became 
the symbol of the invasion trauma (see http://www.ndimou.gr/kypros_gr.asp). It has been since 
duplicated in numerous official and unofficial sites both in Greece and the Republic of Cyprus as 
a visual representation of commemoration and resistance and it is by far the most successful 
visual image that has enshrined the notion of “1974” as a trauma at the level of popular culture.  

 

 

 

 

211

The presence of the ‘I don’t forget’ logo in schools complements a cross-course 

educational goal of transferring the traumatic memory of “1974” to the new generation. Whereas 
there is no particular course devoted to the 1974 events, the whole curriculum, from kindergarten 
to the last year of Lyceum (ages 4-17) is infused with references to the problem of occupation. A 
familiar ritual in Greek Cypriot schools every September is the decoration of classrooms with 
landscape pictures of the northern occupied areas of the island and the distribution of student 
workbooks that feature these locations on the cover. The phrase “I don’t forget and I struggle” is 
inscribed prominently on classroom boards as teachers hang the pictures on the walls and 
identify on the Cyprus map the location of northern occupied villages and cities. The principals’ 
welcoming remarks and the Minister’s address to all students that is read on the first school 
assembly invariably include references to the problem of occupation in Cyprus and the desire to 
return to these areas and reunify the island. For example, in 2006 the Minister wrote: “In these 
difficult conditions of the 21st century world, our homeland is waging its own struggle to 
achieve, through peaceful means, the liberation of our occupied areas that have been under the 
foot of the Turkish Attila [Turkish army] for the past 32 years.”196  In 2008 the Minister’s 
address included similar remarks: “Unfortunately, this new school year finds Cyprus divided by 
occupation. I hope that this will be the last year.” 197 

Educators seize every opportunity to bring up references to the problem of occupation, 

whether talking about Arbor Week—references to the natural resources of the occupied part—or 
Easter Week—the occupation of Cyprus compared to Christ’s persecution and crucifixion. The 
“I don’t forget” objective is registered as the primary goal ‘under emphasis’ every new school 
year and it saturates all aspects of the curriculum by functioning not as a distant historical event 
but as a current cultural issue that has touched the lives of all Greek Cypriots. Essay 
competitions and art exhibits regularly call students to narrate and illustrate the suffering of 
1974: students write about the beauty of the occupied villages and the pain and longing of 
refugees; they draw picturesque landscapes of the areas they have not visited and portray the 
suffering of the mothers of the missing persons.  

The focus of this curricular goal is decidedly emotional rather than anything related to the 

specific events preceding or following the 1974 Turkish invasion. In fact, teachers avoid any 
references to episodes around the Turkish invasion that may taint this monochromatic view of 
history and they steer clear of any references to ‘dangerous memories’ that may challenge the 
view that Greek Cypriots were the absolute victims of the island’s recent history (Christou, 
2007). School fieldwork studies have documented the nature of the “I don’t forget” curriculum 
that narrates suffering only from a Greek Cypriot perspective and serves to maintain stark 
contrasts between ‘Us’ and ‘Others’ (Spyrou, 2001; 2002; Philippou, 2005; Christou, 2006). This 
construction of the absolute evil and the absolute victim is a necessary step in the assembly of a 
tragic narrative that becomes an iconic event of suffering for a social group (Alexander, 2004b). 
Thus, “1974” is educationally re-enacted as a cultural trauma through narrative, aesthetic 

and religious performances that routinize an exceptional event into an everyday recurrent 
experience for all Greek Cypriots. It could be argued that the “I don’t forget” objective is a 
paradoxical, if not an impossible goal: It demands that new generations identify with the memory 
and the suffering of events not personally experienced. But it is precisely this paradox that makes 
“1974” an exemplary cultural trauma – for it has to a large extent succeeded in imparting its 
                                                 
196 From http://www.schools.ac.cy/dde/circular/data/Doc5039.pdf, retrieved April 10, 2009 
197 From http://www.schools.ac.cy/dde/circular/data/Doc7390.pdf, retrieved April 10, 2009 
 

 

212

The trauma of 1974 is evoked not only in the commemoration of the day of the 1974 

emotional impact to younger generations. Even though students’ reactions to the “I don’t forget” 
curriculum can range from a sense of obligation to the concern that the larger society is not 
identified with the trauma anymore, the younger generation reflects on “1974” with a sense of 
sacred responsibility (Christou, 2006). As Alexander (2004a) argues, cultural traumas allow 
members of the wider public to participate in other people’s pain and thus, create new avenues of 
social incorporation. This can also be seen in the transformation of the phrase from “I don’t 
forget” in the 1970s and 1980s, to the most recent (1990s) “I don’t forget and I struggle” or even 
in some cases “I know, I don’t forget and I struggle”; clearly aimed at creating a clearer sense of 
identification with the cultural trauma. 
 
invasion; a day that is commemorated by Greek Cypriot authorities as a sad anniversary and by 
Turkish Cypriot authorities as a day of deliverance, complete with a military parade and with the 
participation of state dignitaries from mainland Turkey. Rather, the presence of the 1974 trauma 
is strong and colors all anniversaries as such. A case in point is the celebration of March 25 – the 
anniversary of Greek independence that is promptly celebrated by Greek Cypriots as a 
celebration that marks their symbolic inclusion into the Greek nation. March 25 is both a 
religious and a secular national holiday for the day is also Annunciation Day in the Greek 
Orthodox calendar. It was originally selected to coincide with the anniversary of the 1821 Greek 
revolution for its potent symbolic character: the birth of Christ is but a metaphor for the birth of 
modern Greece (see Roudometof, 2005). What is of particular significance in the Cypriot context 
though and what marks off this celebration in Cyprus – as opposed to mainland Greece – is its 
strong connection to a day of return to the lost homelands. In March 25 2009, for example, in 
one of the speeches delivered in one of the churches of the Nicosia metropolitan area, the priest 
made explicit and clear-cut references to “1974”. “We must endure” he said, “and keep our faith 
to God in order to go through these difficult times.” Hope of return to “our ancestral homelands” 
should not be abandoned, and the faithful should hold fast to their belief that, with the help of 
God, this will be accomplished. 198 What is important here is evocation of such a day of return in 
the context of a completely unrelated national holiday – a striking connection gone unnoticed by 
Greek Cypriots but immediately visible to non-natives.  

The same belief is manifested in the University of Cyprus’ commemorations of March 

25. Typical commemorative celebrations conclude with the signing of the Cretan folk song “Pote 
tha Kanei xasteria” (Πότε θα κάμει ξαστεριά). The folk song has gone through a native 
adaptation whereby its original place names have been replaced by references to the refugees’ 
regions – Kerynia, the mountain of Pentadaktylus, Mofru and so on. In its reinterpretation the 
song goes as this:  
 
«Πότε θα κάνει ξαστεριά,  
πότε θα φλεβαρίσει,  
να κατεβώ στον Όλυμπο,  
στην έμορφη Κερύνεια  
στη Μόρφου και στη Μεσαριά,  
σ’ όλη την Καρπασία  
να δω τον Πενταδάκτυλο  
να μου χαμογελάει..  
Πότε θα κάνει ξαστεριά...»  
                                                 
198 The quotes are based on participant observation by one of the authors.  

 

213

 
How long till clear sky  
How long until February comes around 
To walk down from (Mt.) Olympus  
To the beautiful Kerynia 
To Morfu and Mesaria  
To all of Karpasia  
To see Pentadaktylus  
Smile to me  
How long till clear sky. . . 199  
 
Hence, in the context of a celebration unrelated to “1974” as such the event resurfaces in all its 
potency: Not only is the event forcefully altering the nature of the occasion in the Cypriot 
context (versus the March 25 celebrations within the Greek state) but it becomes the dominant 
point of reference in local discourse.    

The cultural trauma of 1974 can further be identified in everyday rituals that attempt to 

symbolically reconstruct the lost home in the context of temporary refugee housing. When Greek 
Cypriot refugees fled from their homes in July and August of 1974 many believed that the 
military intervention would be temporary given that Turkey had attempted to intervene in Cyprus 
already since the 1960s. So, most refugees did not pack any belongings as they believed that they 
would return home in a matter of days. But when they narrate their experiences many years and 
decades after the event, Greek Cypriot refugees begin their stories by emphasizing the sudden 
and unforeseen displacement that forced them to leave without taking anything with them: “We 
left with nothing, just what we were wearing” is a common opening line. The meaning of 
‘nothing’ in this phrase implies that the body is left exposed because of its dislocation from its 
context. According to Connerton (1989) the body is the main vehicle of habitual memory 
because through ritual bodily performances the collective shared history is transformed into a 
deeply personal experience. In this way, commemorative rituals exercise a bodily discipline that 
re-inscribes the event through the “mnemonics of the body” (Connerton, 1989: 9).  

The refugees’ rituals, therefore, often attempt to re-contextualize the body in the foreign 

environment: they build an identical fireplace as the one they had “back home” or plant an 
orange tree in their small backyard to take care of it as they used to do before becoming refugees. 
The refugees reclaim their lost past through everyday routines that maintain the traditional social 
bonds of the pre-1974 life (Zetter, 1999). These punctuate everyday conversations of Greek 
Cypriots and their stories are inevitably always connected to the cultural trauma of 1974. The 
reminders can be as mundane as the aroma of oranges—which, refugees are quick to say that 
they do not taste the same as the ones they grew back home—or as generalized as the bitterness 
of being the world’s forgotten victims of human rights violations. Through these discursive and 
bodily performances of recollecting & symbolically reconstituting the occupied home and land, 
refugees and their families routinely evoke the horrendous event of 1974 and make it part of the 
routine of everyday life on the island.  

Following the immediate events of the summer of 1974, and when it became apparent 

that return would not be easily achieved, a large number of refugee associations were established 
in the south—generally one association for every village or city. Not only do these associations 
                                                 
199 Translation by the authors. There are numerous variants of this folk song. Within Greece, it is often related to 

hardcore Greek nationalist circles.  

 

214

draw attention to the centrality of kinship structure and place of origin as cultural markers of 
membership, but they also serve the purpose of creating a geographical reference point to the lost 
land. All such communities have established refugee associations in the Greek-controlled post-
1974 Republic of Cyprus. Their function is to keep the dispersed population in touch through 
religious and national celebrations, thereby maintaining a sense of origin and preventing 
dissolution of the original village unit. Refugees regularly attend the weddings and funerals of 
co-villagers wherever they may be taking place in the southern part of the island. Death notices 
in the newspaper, tombstones and wedding invitations always identify the family’s origin in the 
occupied part followed by their current, ‘temporary’ residence (Zetter, 1994).  

Furthermore, the post-1974 designation and institutionalization of the refugee label has 
created the conditions for the universalization of the refugees´ loss and the possibility that all 
Greek Cypriots could identify with the pain of uprootedness. That is, official legislation enacted 
on September 19, 1974 (Ministry Council decision 13.503) 200 specifies that a “refugee” is a 
person who before and up to July 1974 permanently resided in an area that is currently under 
Turkish occupation. The decision was amended in 1995 to include those who owned land and 
property in the occupied part even if their permanent residence at the time of the invasion was in 
the areas that remained under the control of the Republic of Cyprus. The legislation—
accompanied by the bureaucracy of refugee identification cards and related documentation—has 
offered to refugees specific advantages such as, access to low cost government housing estates, 
financial aid for building a house or purchasing an apartment and renting allowances. Their 
status is inherited patrimonially—but not matrimonially—thereby reassuring the continued 
construction of generations of refugees for several decades after the event. Intermarriage further 
reassures that the refugee status is diffused throughout the Greek Cypriot community, and 
therefore its existence becomes part of the fabric of all Greek Cypriots—even for those who 
were not personally affected.  

The nature of the victim is therefore not limited to the individuals directly affected by the 

invasion but is relayed as the generalized Greek Cypriot victim of Turkish military aggression. 
The president’s opening quote comes from a speech given on Saint Charalambos’ celebration—
the patron saint of the occupied village of Kontea—that the Kontea refugees organized to 
commemorate the religious day. The president addressed the refugees by connecting the 
religious commemoration to the commemoration of 1974 and the struggle for solution to the 
Cyprus issue: “Today,” he said, “Kontea celebrates its patron Saint Charalambos. But, the 
President went on, “Kontea also honors her children who were killed during the tragedy of 1974. 
[…] Kontea does not forget and, in the endless bitterness of refugeehood and uprooting, it resists, 
it hopes and it anticipates.”  

It is plain that even after decades of “protracted exile” there is a strong sense of 

inconceivable injustice perpetrated upon the natives. This sense of injustice is coupled with a 
metaphysical faith in the possibility of divine justice to foster a deep-seeded belief in the ‘myth 
of return’ (Zetter, 1999). To understand why 1974 has been encoded as such a pervasive cultural 
trauma it is necessary to refer to the radical social, political and economic transformations of the 
second half of the 20th century. Following transition from British colonial status to the 1960 
founding of the Republic of Cyprus, the island’s economy functioned, for the first time, under 
the status of an independent state and slowly began to expand its agricultural and tourism sectors. 
                                                 
200 More at 

http://www.mfa.gov.cy/mfa/mfa2006.nsf/All/5C42EAB55AEA9A5EC22571B0003E0AF5?OpenDocument, 
retrieved April 16, 2009. 

 

215

The 1963-1974 interethnic conflicts and the Turkish Cypriots’ withdrawal from the government 
fostered uncertainty but also increased the socio-economic gap between the two groups, with 
Greek Cypriots advancing more than Turkish Cypriots (Kedourie, 2005). The major and abrupt 
setback was the 1974 events that brought all major functions of the economy to a halt. Nicosia’s 
airport, the only airport on the island at the time, was caught in the buffer zone between the two 
sides while a third of the population lost its entire livelihood means and the tourist industry’s 
major hubs came under Turkish military occupation. For Greek Cypriots, this bode a future of 
dark economic times but with a steady stream of foreign aid the economy in the South recovered 
at an unprecedented rate during the 1980s—a development that has been dubbed as ‘The Cyprus 
Miracle’ (Christodoulou 1992). It is important to emphasize, however, that this was not the fate 
of the northern part of the island inhabited by Turkish Cypriots. The lack of an internationally 
recognized status caused the economy to suffer and development has been at a much slower rate. 
As a result, for Greek Cypriots who experienced these wild swings of personal and social 
misfortune, the pre-1974 reality has been the subject of romanticized post-1974 reconstructions 
and of the nostalgia expressed for a tradition unfettered by the problems and complications of the 
post-1974 modernization 
 
Trauma Transmission: Facing the Challenges of Time 

The intergenerational dynamics that weave narratives of loss and suffering in the context 
of the family are important sites in the construction of the 1974 cultural trauma. Cultural trauma 
theory examines the practices of collective memory production and transference to the next 
generation. Influenced by Durkheim’s argument on the centrality of social and group realities 
that provide resonance and authority to collective representations (Fowler, 2005), Halbwachs’ 
(1941/1992) groundbreaking work on collective memory posed that we recall, recognize and 
localize our memories in a societal context. An essential aspect of social solidarity, collective 
memory is located in the interrelations of groups such as the family or the social class. 201 

 For Halbwachs the interests, concerns and problems of the present also shape collective 

memory. Greek Cypriot refugees’ stories about the occupied part have been a perpetual 
connection between the past and the present. Second generation refugees, that is, those born to 
refugee families after 1974, grew up exposed to vivid accounts of the lost land and have adopted, 
to a large extend, a refugee identity (Hadjiyanni, 2002). First generation refugees have always 
expressed their collective anxiety for the erosion of the memory of the occupied land and they 
see their stories as a way to maintain alive the desire for return. These family narratives mediate 
symbolically between the past and the present and create meanings that connect parents and 
children (Hinchman and Hinchman, 1997). The telling of traumatic stories is a way of structuring 
                                                 
201 The interdisciplinary surge of interest in memory studies is fueled both by events that have generated a 

‘commemorative fever’ in the 1980s and 1990s but also by the booming of cultural artifacts (film, photography, 
internet media, artificial memory storage) that facilitate the collective processes of bringing the past into the 
present (Misztal, 2003). Huyssen (2003) argues that whereas 20th century nation states sought to monumentalize 
national history, today we witness a fascination with the processes of remembering and forgetting. Utopian 
visions of the future, the staple of the first half of the 20th century, have given way to the appeal of the past and 
what he calls a ‘hypertrophy of memory’. This is evident in the rise of visual cultures of documenting and 
commemorating the past as well as architectural creations that monumentalize cultural traumas. For an overview 
of recent perspectives, see Roudometof (2007).  

 

 

216

experience and producing meaning out of disparate or incomprehensible events (Ricoeur, 1988). 
Children of refugee families ‘remember’ the occupied part and identify with their parents’ pain: 
 

I saw a dream that Cyprus was, I saw the shape of Cyprus in the form of trees. […] 
And my mother told me that maybe when I was younger and I was listening about it 
all the time, I created a picture of it in my mind, so it wasn’t a dream. But I believed 
that I saw it. I feel very strongly that I saw it. And my mother told me that this place 
was on route to Apostolos Andreas.  Nasia, 15 years old 
During  the  summer  when  I  see  the  orange  trees,  I  remember  the  oranges  of 
Ammochostos. Ore when we have the flower festival in Larnaca, I remember that we 
used to have the same in Ammochostos.  Maria, 16 years old 
In our family gatherings, we talk about the invasion.  And I hear how [my father] 
talks about the people who are lost and the people who were killed and I see him cry.  
And that's when you think, ‘Why did they do this to us?’  And no one cares about it.  
[…] He talks about Kerynia where they sent all the soldiers and lined them up.  It’s 
difficult to know that you may lose your husband or your father or your child, your 
son. Eleni, 16 years old202 

 
Nasia, Maria and Eleni have never been to Apostolos Andreas or Famagusta (Ammochostos) or 
Kerynia but their ‘memories’ of the occupied areas sound as vivid as any personal account can 
be. In the first narrative, the dream is a surreal account of an experience that has not taken place 
and it symbolizes the metaphorical dream of return even if the return will only be a first 
experience for Nasia. The younger generation of refugees has internalized these memories to the 
extent that the word ‘remember’ is used in a way that collapses the limits between personal and 
collective memory. As these narratives saturate everyday family encounters, the younger 
generation is left with a heavy legacy of memory and the burden to realize the mythical return. 
Nevertheless, the second generation’s emotional connection with their occupied homes is less 
identified with the idealization of the past and more with the idealization of a future where the 
restoration of the human rights of property and freedom of movement can finally materialize 
(Zetter, 1999). 

On the other hand, the post-1974 economic realities on the island have conditioned 
different kinds of expectations for the new generation of Greek Cypriots. Cyprus became a 
member of the European Union in 2004, in an awkward agreement that recognizes suspension of 
EU law in the northern part of the island currently not under the control of the Republic of 
Cyprus. The 35-year-old shift from refugee tents to a booming economy is met with a collective 
Greek Cypriot pride for the hard-working ethic that paid off. Nevertheless, the new comforts 
became an uncomfortable reality that contradicts the need to maintain the ‘fighting spirit’ for a 
solution to the Cyprus problem (Christou, 2006). The younger generation exemplifies a 
materialist turn that, for the older generation, is at odds with the existential need to preserve this 
‘fighting spirit’: 

 
The new generation… grew up with more luxuries. They didn’t go through the 
experience of being a refugee. They didn’t have the experience of living in a tent and 
have the tent leak during the winter and you don’t know where to sleep. We spent two 
months in a bus and we were sleeping on the seats—from my grandfather to the 

                                                 
202 Excerpts from interviews with children of refugee families, Christou (2002). 

 

217

youngest child—two months! We are another generation. We went through this 
hardship. But… these kids are used to luxury and so they get used to easy money. And 
the parents give money too easily because they were deprived of it growing up.203 

 
The younger generation, therefore, is constructed as the promise of the nation and as a potential 
obstacle in maintaining the fight for return. In this sense, the cultural trauma depends on the 
strength of the intergenerational dynamic that sustains it. As already discussed in the previous 
section, the refugee family has been an important site for the commemoration and generational 
transference of the refugee trauma.  

And yet, when compared to the generation that actually experienced coexistence with 
Turkish Cypriots, the younger Greek Cypriot generation is more inclined to show a preference 
for separation (for statistics, see Webster, 2005; Georgiades, 2007). The same generational 
pattern was also observed in the 2004 Annan Plan referendum with higher rates of negative 
Greek Cypriot votes by those born after 1974 compared to the previous generation (Webster, 
2005). This was a paradox to many observers, as the evidence overturned simplistic accounts of 
collective conflict predicated upon personal animosity. From within the lenses of cultural trauma 
theory, though, the result simply registers the successful routinization and reproduction of 
“1974” as a cultural trauma. For the reader of the preceding pages, it should not come as a 
surprise that those who lack personal remembrance of the pre-1974 reality will be the least 
inclined toward inter-communal coexistence. How and under what circumstances can the “1974” 
trauma be left behind?  

The normative implications generated by the routinization of the “1974” cultural trauma 

can also be seen in the events that challenge its educational primacy. For example, an August 
2008 circular by the Ministry of Education identified the first goal of the new school year as 
follows: “The cultivation of a culture of peaceful coexistence, mutual respect and collaboration 
between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots with the goal of removing occupation and 
reuniting our homeland and our people.”204 For the first time since 1974, the Ministry’s 
leadership outlined the vision of an educational system that nurtures a culture of reconciliation 
between the two main communities on the island; a goal that should be expected, especially 
given the fact that re-unification has been the explicit and expressed political goal of the Greek 
Cypriot community as well as the official position of the Republic of Cyprus. The circular 
however, caused heated reactions by teachers’ unions which claimed that the already burdened 
curriculum cannot support an additional goal that may be difficult to implement. The elementary 
school teachers’ union POED said that schools should not be forced to visit Turkish Cypriot 
institutions in the north and argued—as the head of POED claimed in an interview for a Greek 
television channel205—that such actions can ‘confuse’ 8-year-old children and hurt teachers’ and 
parents’ ‘sensitivities’.  

In an open letter to teachers the union pointed out that given the ‘realities’ in Cyprus, “the 
goal of ‘I know, I don’t forget and I struggle’ remains a permanent objective under emphasis, to 
underscore the struggle of our educational system to liberate and reunite our homeland.” Irony 
and blatant contradictions aside, it is important to note the language of emotional appeal—
confusion, sensibilities—that registers a resistance to desecrate the cultural trauma by diluting its 
                                                 
203 Excerpt from interview with a refugee mother (Christou, 2002). 
204 From http://www.schools.ac.cy/dde/circular/data/Doc7387.pdf retrieved April 17, 2009. 
205 The full 15 minute report on “Cyprus History Lessons” by Sky News can be found at 

http://www.skai.gr/master_avod.php?id=115439&cid=61569&bc=61569&lsc=1, retrieved March 29, 2009. 

 

218

emotional strength. It also illustrates the compulsory return to the trauma drama (Alexander, 
2004b) which emphasizes the possibility that “1974” or any cultural trauma could happen again. 
In April 2003, the Turkish Cypriot leadership, under mounting popular pressure from the 
declining economic situation in the north, decided to lift the ban on movement across the Green 
Line. This meant that, for the first time in 29 years, Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots would 
be able to visit the areas that were largely inaccessible to them. This almost surprising turn of 
events challenged not only existing understandings of the political will of the other side but also 
the supposedly shared comprehension of terms such as ‘state’ and ‘authority’ (Demetriou, 2007). 
Some cynical comments by Greek Cypriots in the early days contended that the Turkish Cypriot 
leadership’s shrewd move served to politically elevate the appearance of ‘good will’ for a 
solution to the Cyprus problem while creating the conditions for Greek Cypriots to swallow the 
reality of division and thus eliminate the problem itself. The idea was that Greek Cypriots facing 
their dilapidated houses or entering them as visitors of new (Turkish) owners will give up on the 
hope of return and reunification of the island. 

Crossing the Green line to visit the hitherto inaccessible northern part of the island was 

subject to a variety of interpretations. For some, outright refusal was the only dignified response 
because Turkish Cypriot authorities forced all those who wish to cross to display their ID papers. 
This turned natives into “tourists” to their own land (Dikomitis, 2005). Others, though, were 
moved more by material considerations, opting to cross the Green line in search of cheaper 
goods and services. To these two diametrically opposed interpretations, it is necessary to add a 
third and perhaps more widespread interpretation of crossing. For many Greek Cypriot refugees, 
crossing the buffer zone became an act of pilgrimage (Dikomitis, 2004. 2005). As Dikomitis 
(2004) points out, the refugees literally moved the earth by collecting water and soil to take back 
with them. Their visits to the occupied areas became a ritual of visiting their house, the church 
and the cemetery. They collected soil from the graves and anointed themselves with the water 
running at the center of the village. Parents came with children who have never seen their 
ancestral lands and who were told repeatedly of these lost territories.  

Crossing the Green line entailed elements of sacralization of these territories which in 
turn maintained the mythologization of the island’s occupied part. These visits were also short 
lived experiments that did not confirm expectations for a widening inter-communal relationship. 
Over time, the number of visits dropped significantly:  Once visited, the promised lands of the 
north returned to their mythological status as an imaginary topos for Greek Cypriots.  

This imaginary topos is not located solely in a different space but also in a different time. 

For example, in a newspaper article206 titled ‘Mores and Customs of Christmas and New Year: 
Nostalgia for Tradition’ (December 27, 2009), a Greek Cypriot woman details the making of 
traditional sweets and the Christmas family rituals of the past. The woman and her husband 
reminisce the days when these customs were authentically practiced, when people were pure 
enough to appreciate their significance and poor enough to be grateful for a pair of pants and a 
piece of warm pastry. The opening lines set the narrative in the context of ‘traditional 
grandmothers’ of Paralimni who ‘reminisce their childhood years and the festive days in 
Rizokarpaso, Varosi and Kerynia’. Without naming them as such, the article is situated in the 
nostalgia of older refugee women for the past—a pre-1974 past, rife with tradition and the 
virtues of simple life. The article ends with the following words: 
 
                                                 
206 Politis newspaper, 27 December, 2009 at http://www.politis-news.com/cgibin/hweb?-A=843521&-V=archive&-

w=ΗΘΗ@ΚΑΙ@ΕΘΙΜΑ@&-P 

 

219

Ms Androula, on the other hand, feels that as faithfully as she tries to preserve these 
customs she can never be as happy as she used to be in Karpasi [occupied area]. ‘I 
believe that refugeehood has left a bitterness inside us and it is difficult for us to be 
joyful  and  carefree  like  the  old  days’,  says  Ms  Androula  expressing  her  grievance 
and wishing that warmth and peace can return to people’s hearts, in a Cyprus that is 
free and reunited. 

 
Just like the president’s talk professed a break from ‘age-old habits and folkloric traditions’ 
caused by the invasion, the article assembles a narrative of double-coded loss where the 
refugees’ memories of the occupied part are the memories of tradition. Thus, the 1974 events are 
recounted as a break from tradition, the loss of innocence and the pain of losing both a home and 
a heaven of pure, authentic life. In this way, the occupied areas become a time capsule that holds 
not only the answer to happiness but also the solution to the crisis of identity, signified by the 
endangered traditions. Ms Androula laments the inability of the new generation to appreciate the 
laboring process of home-baked goods or the significance of a simple gift made with love. Even 
though she follows these customs with ‘religious piety’ in order to transfer tradition to her 
children and grandchildren, she also feels that in the current context of consumerism and 
material abundance it is difficult for anyone to experience the spirit of the good old days. 
 
Conclusions 
 
This paper begins with the assumption that the events of 1974 possess the potential but not the 
proof that their experience would be traumatizing. In other words, the cultural trauma of 1974 
cannot be objectively deduced from an equation of suffering but it has to be understood through 
the social processes that construct an event as traumatic not only for the present but also for 
future generations. As we explain, there is no escape from “1974” in Cyprus even though the 
manifestations of its commemoration differ depending on which side of the buffer zone one is 
located. For Greek Cypriots who live in the southern part of the island, “1974” is a haunting 
cultural trauma that is impossible to ignore whereas for Turkish Cypriots the events of 1974 have 
concluded the process of inter-communal separation (see Bryant, 2008). In this paper, our 
objective has been confined to discussing the specificity of the Greek Cypriot cultural trauma.  
We argued that for Greek Cypriots “1974” is a horrendous event that stands outside the 

scope of normal time. The articulation of the 1974 cultural trauma through the experience of 
uprootedness and the vision of a day of return is embodied in specific groups that have become 
emblematic of the trauma – these include the refugees, the missing persons and the “enclaved” in 
the north  As ultimate symbols of the trauma drama, these groups have become collective agents 
of the trauma process (Alexander, 2004a) by bearing the burden of narrating the pain and thus by 
inviting members of the wider Greek Cypriot community to identify with them. By functioning 
as metaphors for return (Cassia, 2005) they register the emotional trauma through their liminal 
states of uprootedness, homelessness and dis-embodiment. Thus, they reiterate the exceptionality 
of the 1974 event even as they become the everyday, mundane symbols of it.  

In the paper’s second part, we further sought to illustrate how “1974” is reproduced, 

evoked, represented in everyday rituals, in practices unrelated and seemingly far removed from 
politics. In so doing we aimed to offer examples where trauma is experienced at the very level of 
the mundane –where cultural trauma theory’s applicability has been questioned (Spillman, 

 

220

2005).  In this level, we see the routinization of trauma or its falling back into the background of 
social life. Its manifestations however continue to punctuate everyday conversations, practices 
and thoughts: Everything, from a presidential address to the watering of orange trees or the 
discursive and bodily practices and institutional routines (such as IDs and financial aid) that 
enshrine and reproduce the “refugee” label operate as constant reminders of the cultural trauma 
of “1974” on a daily basis. As such, these reminders become part of everyday routine, ritual and 
the taken – for – granted cultural milieu of the Republic of Cyprus. The identification of the post-
1974 military occupation of part of the island with the loss of folkways and tradition in general 
universalizes the trauma beyond the loss of property and mirrors the two processes as one. As the 
occupied areas become emblematic of tradition, the invasion of 1974 is narrated as the invasion 
of modernity that unsettled people, mores and fundamental identity values. The pain of loss and 
the desire for return are, therefore, a cultural urgency for return to tradition.  

But the trauma’s hold is not restricted to the generation of those who have personally 
experienced the events of the summer of 1974. It extends to the totality of Greek Cypriots and 
most importantly to those who have been born after 1974 or who were too young to have 
personal memories of the events. Notwithstanding the religious undertones of a ‘fall from Eden’ 
the “return of the trauma narrative” is located in intergenerational dynamics that can only be 
understood as an all-consuming cultural framework, which refracts all societal changes in the 
prism of 1974. If life before the invasion is mythologized, the post-1974 context is vilified as 
national degeneration. For the older generation of Greek Cypriots “modern” is what came after 
1974 and is what threatens the memory of tradition and fuels the desire of return. 

While seemingly routine, the cultural trauma’s intergenerational transmission remains 
contested and consequential. In fact, in the second and third sections of this paper, we argued 
that the focus of official remembrance – under the “I don’t forget” slogan – has contributed to an 
extensive absorption into the collectivity’s own suffering, even to the detriment of endorsing the 
goal of coexistence with the Turkish Cypriots in a future re-unified Cyprus. For the younger 
generations experience the trauma unconnected to personal memory and simply as a cultural 
construct, whereby its resolution can be sought only in a future settlement that would fulfill the 
Greek Cypriot national objectives. The emotional burden of the cultural trauma for Greek 
Cypriots, therefore, is so extensive that it raises the community’s expectations of what would 
constitute an acceptable solution to island’s political troubles. We dare say that any successful 
solution of the Cyprus issue would need to offer not only practical solutions for dealing with the 
island’s problems of political governance but it would also need to heal the Greek Cypriots´ 
cultural trauma by restoring that community’s “fall from grace”.   
 
References  
 
Alexander, Jeffrey C. (2004a). “Toward a theory of cultural trauma.” In Jeffrey C. Alexander, 

Eyerman, R., Giesen, B., Smelser, N.J., and Sztompka, R. (Eds.) Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity, pp. 1-30. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Alexander, Jeffrey C. (2004b). “On the social construction of moral universals: the ‘Holocaust’ 

from war crime to trauma drama.” In Jeffrey C. Alexander, Eyerman, R., Giesen, B., 
Smelser, N.J., and Sztompka, R. (Eds.) Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity, pp. 196-
263. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Anastasiou, Harry (2002). Communication across conflict lines: The case of ethnically divided 

Cyprus. Journal of Peace Research, 39 (5): 581-596. 

 

221

Anderson, Benedict (1991) Imagined Communities. London: Verso (2nd edition). 
Attalides, Michael (1976). Forms of peasant incorporation in Cyprus during the last century. 

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 268: 363-378. 

Attalides, Michael (1979) Cyprus: Nationalism and International Politics. Edinburgh: Q Press. 
Bourdieu, Pierre (1989) “Social Space and Symbolic Power” Sociological Theory 7 (1) [Spring]: 

14-25.  

Bourdieu, Pierre (1990) The Logic of Practice. Stanford: Stanford University Press.  
Bryant, Rebecca (2002). The purity of spirit and the power of blood: a comparative perspective 
on nation, kinship and gender in Cyprus. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 8: 
509-530. 

Bryant, Rebecca (2008). Writing the Catastrophe: Nostalgia and Its Histories in Cyprus. Journal 

of Modern Greek Studies 26 (2): 399-422  

Cassia, Paul Sant (2005). Bodies of Evidence: Burial, Memory and the Recovery of Missing 

Persons in Cyprus. New York: Berghahn Books. 

Cassia, Paul Sant (2006). “Guarding each other’s dead, mourning one’s own: The problem of 

missing persons and missing pasts in Cyprus.” South European Society and Politics, 11 (1): 
111-128. 

Christodoulou, Demetrios (1992). Inside the Cyprus Miracle: The labours of an embattled mini-
economy. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press (Minnesota Mediterranean and 
East European Monographs). 

Christou, Miranda (2006). “A Double Imagination: Memory and Education in Cyprus,” Journal 

of Modern Greek Studies, 24 (2): 285-306 

Christou, Miranda (2007). “The Language of Patriotism: Sacred History and Dangerous 

Memories,” British Journal of Sociology of Education, 28 (6): 709-722. 

Cockburn, Cynthia (2004). The Line: Women, Partition and the Gender Order in Cyprus. New 

York: Zed Books. 

Connerton, Paul (1989). How Societies Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Demetriou, Olga (2006). “Freedom Square: The unspoken reunification of a divided city.” 

Hagar: Studies in Culture, Polity and Identities, 7 (1): 55-77. 

Demetriou, Olga (2007). “To cross or not to cross? Subjectivization and the absent state in 

Cyprus.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 13: 987-1006. 

Dikomitis, Lisa (2004). “A moving field: Greek Cypriot refugees returning ‘home’.” Durham 

Anthropology Journal, 12 (1): 7-20. 

Dikomitis, Lisa (2005) “Three Readings of a Border: Greek Cypriots Crossing the Green Line in 

Cyprus,” Anthropology Today 21 October (5): 7-12 

Fowler, Bridget (2005). “Collective Memory and Forgetting: Components for a Study of 

Obituaries.” Theory, Culture & Society, 22 (6): 53-72. 

Georgiades, Savvas D. (2007). “Public attitudes towards peace: The Greek Cypriot position.” 

Journal of Peace Research, 44 (5): 573-586. 

Hadjiyanni, Tasoulla (2002). The Making of a Refugee: Children Adopting Refugee Identity in 

Cyprus. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. 

Halbwachs, Maurice ([1941] 1992). On Collective Memory. Translation Lewis A. Coser. 

Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.  

 

222

Hinchman, Lewis P. and Sandra K. Hinchman (1997) “Introduction.” In L. P. Hinchman and S. 
K. Hinchman (Eds.) Memory, Identity, Community: The Idea of Narrative in the Human 
Sciences, Pp. iii–xxxii. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

Huyssen, Andreas (2003) Present Pasts: Urban Palimpsests and the Politics of Memory. 

California: Stanford University Press. 

Kedourie, Elie (2005) “The Cyprus Problem and Its Solution,” Middle Eastern Studies (41) 5 

[September]: 649-660  

Loizos, Peter (1975). The Greek Gift: Politics in a Cypriot Village. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Loizos, Peter (1981). The Heart Grown Bitter: A Chronicle of Cypriot War Refugees. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Loizos, Peter & Costas Constantinou (2007). “Hearts as well as Minds: Wellbeing and Illness 

among Greek Cypriot Refugees.” Journal of Refugee Studies, 20 (1): 86-107. 

Loizos, Peter & Evthymios Papataxiarchis (Eds.) (1991). Contested Identities: Gender and 

Kinship in Modern Greece. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Markides, Kyriakos (1977) The Rise and Fall of the Cyprus Republic. New Haven, CT: Yale 

University Press. 

Mavratsas, Ceasar V. (1996). “Approaches to Nationalism: Basic Theoretical Considerations in 
the Study of the Greek Cypriot Case and a Historical Overview.” Journal of the Hellenic 
Diaspora 22: 77-102. 

Mavratsas, Ceasar V. (1997). “The Ideological Contest between Greek-Cypriot nationalism and 
Cypriotism 1974-1995: Politics, Social Memory and Identity.” Ethnic and Racial Studies, 
20: 717-737. 

Misztal, Barbara A. (2003). Theories of Social Remembering. Maidenhead, Philadelphia: Open 

University Press. 

Papadakis, Yiannis (1993). The Politics of Memory and Forgetting in Cyprus. Journal of 

Mediterranean Studies, 3: 139-154. 

Papadakis, Yiannis (1998). “Greek Cypriot narratives of history and collective identity: 

nationalism as a contested process.” American Ethnologist 25(2): 149-165. 

Papadakis, Yiannis (2003). “Nation, narrative and commemoration: Political ritual in divided 

Cyprus.” History and Anthropology, 14 (3): 253-270. 

Philippou, Stavroula (2005). ‘‘Constructing National and European Identities: The Case of 

Greek-Cypriot Children.’’ Educational Studies 31 (3): 293–315. 

Ricoeur, Paul (1988) Time and Narrative. Vol. 3. Trans. Kathleen Blamey and David Pellauer. 

Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 

Rydgren, Jens (2007) “The Power of the Past: A Contribution to a Cognitive Sociology of Ethnic 

Conflict,” Sociological Theory (25) 3: 225-44 

Roudometof, Victor (2005) “National Commemorations in the Balkans,” pp. 35-59 in Michael 
Geisler (ed.), National Symbols, Fractured Identities: Contesting the National Narrative 
Hanover: University Press of New England. 

Roudometof, Victor (2007) “Collective Memory and Cultural Politics: An Introduction,” Journal 

of Political and Military Sociology (35) 1: 1-16 

 

223

Smelser, Neil, J. (2004). “September 11, 2001, as Cultural Trauma.” In Jeffrey C. Alexander, 
Eyerman, R., Giesen, B., Smelser, N.J., and Sztompka, R. (Eds.) Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity, pp. 264-282. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Spillman, Lyn (2005) “Is the ´Strong Program’ Strong Enough?” Culture: Newsletter of the 
Sociology of Culture Section of the American Sociological Association (19) 2: 1, 4-6.  
Spyrou, Spyros (2001). “Those on the other side: ethnic identity and imagination in Greek-

Cypriot children’s lives,” in: H. Schwartzman (Ed.) Children and anthropology: 
perspectives for the 21st century, pp. 167–185. Westport, CT, and London: Bergin & 
Garvey. 

Spyrou, Spyros (2002). “Images of ‘the other’: ‘the Turk’ in Greek-Cypriot children’s 

imaginations.” Race, Ethnicity and Education, 5 (3): 255–271. 

Stamatakis, Nikos A. (1991). “History and Nationalism: The Cultural Reconstruction of the 

Modern Greek Cypriot Identity.” The Cyprus Review 3 (1): 59-86. 

Webster, Craig (2005). “Division or unification in Cyprus? The role of demographics, attitudes, 
and party inclination on Greek Cypriot preferences for a solution to the Cyprus problem.” 
Ethnopolitics, 4 (3):299-309. 

Zetter, Roger (1999). “Reconceptualizing the Myth of Return: Continuity and Transition 

Amongst the Greek-Cypriot Refugees of 1974.” Journal of Refugee Studies, 12 (1): 1-22. 

Zetter, Roger (1994). “The Greek Cypriot Refugees: Perceptions of Return under Conditions of 

Protracted Exile.” International Migration Review, 28: 307-322. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

224

Ivana Spasić 
 
THE TRAUMA OF KOSOVO IN SERBIAN NATIONAL NARRATIVES 
 
A story about stories 

On the face of it, this is a perfect case of cultural trauma. If asked what distinguishes 
them as a nation, most Serbs would tell you it is the memory of the Battle of Kosovo, fought 
between the Serbian army and the forces of Ottoman Turks in 1389. Serbs lost the battle, and 
their prince was killed. The event marked the collapse of the medieval Serbian state and 
beginning of the long Ottoman domination. The Kosovo sore, wound or pain, as it is usually 
called in the “stories Serbs tell themselves about themselves” (Živković 2001a), that is, the 
aggrieved but proud feeling of tragedy, death and loss engendered by remembrance of the 
Kosovo catastrophe 600 years ago is generally held to be the foundation of Serbian identity, part 
of the very essence of being a Serb. Yet I will not start from the assertion that Kosovo as trauma 
is central to Serbianness, because this is precisely what needs to be examined. I will primarily be 
interested in how this claim has come to look so self-evident. 

“Kosovo” in Serbian national narratives is not a story of a thing, a place, or an event but, 

more than anything else, a story about stories. It is then appropriate to begin with two sets of 
statements, illustrating two broad types of accounts that purport to explain the link between 
Serbs and the symbolism of Kosovo.207  

 

I     

“The Battle of Kosovo is the symbol and mark of Serbian history. ... For the Serbian people, 
Kosovo is the imprint of its identity, the key through which to understand the message of its 
entire history, the banner of national freedom.” (Bogdanović 2006: 410) 
 
“That one event has imprinted itself indelibly on the Serbian soul forever. ... It is a simple matter 
of fact that, whenever Serbs are faced with events of great historical importance, they invariably 
turn to the one source of strength and inspiration – the Kosovo mystique.” (Mihailovich 1991: 
141) 
 
„It is on the tragic myth of a heroic sacrifice and the choice of the eternal life in the heavenly 
kingdom that the moral philosophy of the Serbian people has rested all the way to modern times. 
The ethic and spiritual principles of the Kosovo commitment were the foundation of the spiritual 
life of the entire Serbian people.“ (Palavestra 1991: 23) 
 
“Kosovo is many diverse things to different living Serbs, but they all have it in their blood. They 
are born with it. ... The question of why it is in Serbian blood is never meant to be answered – it is 
a transcendental phenomenon.” (Dragnich and Todorovich 1984: 4) 
 
“For centuries it has been as essential ingredient in the historical consciousness of the Serbian 
people. ... On the six hundredth anniversary of their nation’s Golgotha, Serbian people around the 
world pause to reflect once again on the meaning and impact of a medieval battle which shaped 
their destiny” (Emmert 1990: 142) 

 
                                                 
207 The following quotations are all taken from the broadly scholarly genre of writings which, whether academic or 
more popular, claim a basic factual accuracy and adherence to a methodology. This for the moment excludes 
journalistic, poetic, and overtly propagandistic texts, which will be taken up later on. 

 

225

