Germans should finally break the silence and lay claim to their own suffering, something they 
have done all along. In modern societies, calling something a taboo does not end a conversation 
but on the contrary introduces issues into the public debate in a sensationalist way. Sebald’s 
claim also implies that there is something fundamentally wrong with German war memories. 
Yet, we argue that there is considerable controversy, incoherence and awkwardness, but nothing 
pathological or repressed about the way in which most Germans remember and commemorate 
the devastation of their cities and the death of civilians during the war.  

In developing our argument, we not only agree with but wish to bolster Jeffrey 

Alexander’s and Ron Eyerman’s point that a cultural trauma does not directly flow from 
historical occurrences, however horrible they may have been. Rather, cultural traumas are 
socially constructed through narratives and other forms of representation. For Sebald, the 
absence of almost any trace of pain in the memory of the bombing war is something 
“paradoxical” (Sebald 2004: 4), because he assumes that there is a positive correlation between 
the magnitude of suffering experienced by a collectivity and the intensity of memories 
transmitted from one generation to the next. For us, such a correlation exists only to the extent in 
which a social and political consensus on the meaning of the relevant historical instance of 
suffering can be constructed and effectively communicated. Yet it is also true that a recognizable 
instance of massive suffering is always the raw material of cultural trauma. In fact, the most 
prominent examples of sociological trauma theory have so far been American slavery (Eyerman 
2002) and the Holocaust (Alexander 2003: chap. 2). Slavery in the antebellum South was an 
instance of collective suffering that has been turned into a cultural trauma of successor 
generations of the same victim group of Afro-Americans. The Holocaust was an instance of 
collective suffering that has been turned into a cultural trauma of successor generations of the 
victim group, Jews, as well as for successor generations of (non-Jewish) Germans and other 
national membership groups who were the perpetrators and bystanders of the Holocaust. Our 
case study breaks new ground by focusing on an instance of collective suffering—the Allied 
bombing of German cities during World War II—that has not become a cultural trauma, not even 
for the successor generations of the victim group.144  

In what follows, we give a short overview of the ways in which the air war has been 

remembered, memorialized and commemorated in postwar Germany. We begin by rejecting the 
widespread claim that the memories of German victims, in general, and of civilian bombing 
victims, in particular, were actively silenced in postwar Germany. Instead, we sketch out the 
memory matrix that in our view has underpinned and constrained practices of remembrance of 
the Bombenkrieg. We then turn to three case vignettes to shed light on the reasons why the 
bombings have not given rise to a cultural trauma. First, we highlight the case of Hamburg, 
which among German cities was hit the hardest by British bombers in 1943. More specifically, 
we are interested in how the rise of the Holocaust trauma has rendered the remembrance of the 
firebombing of Hamburg more complex, inconsistent and ultimately non-traumatic. Second, we 
look at attempts to draw analogies between the high-altitude bombing of German cities and the 
bombing of other places, in particular Baghdad in the second Gulf War (1990-91). This analogy 
allowed sections of the German public to mourn the victims of American bombs without 
explicitly reactivating nationalist or revisionist notions of German victimhood. Third, we briefly 
explore the memory and commemoration of the 1945 bombings of Dresden, in which neo-Nazi 
                                                 
144 This is true at least in terms of the cultural trauma theory as proposed by Alexander and Eyerman. In the 
psychoanalytic sense of the term, traumas might well be transmitted through certain communicative strains and 
failings from one generation of both victims and perpetrators to the next (see Bergmann and Jucovy 1990). 

 

160

extremists, who would like to redefine the memory of the bombings as the new cultural trauma 
of post-reunification Germany, play a major role. The final section summarizes the reasons why 
we believe that memory projects aiming at the establishment of a cultural bombing trauma in 
Germany are unlikely to succeed anytime soon. 

 

The German Bombing War Memory Matrix  

Since the reunification of Germany in 1990, every major broadcast or publication on the 
bombing of the country during World War II has been pitched as taboo-breaking. However, there 
has never really been a taboo on representing the suffering of Germans. In fact, this is a rumor or 
legend so ubiquitous that it requires explanation. However, like all rumors and legends, the idea 
of a taboo on representing Germans as victims is based on a small kernel of truth. 

Our main point is that what has been forgotten is not the bombing war itself but its many 
traces in the memories of those who survived and documented it. Artists, in particular, began to 
draw, paint, wood carve, write about and take photos of the destruction often literally as soon as 
the dust had settled after the air raids. Ignoring an official ban imposed by the Nazi government, 
which was later renewed by the Soviet military authorities, more than thirty “rubble 
photographers” emerged in Dresden alone, some of whom like Kurt Schaarschuch and Richard 
Peter quickly rose to fame (Kil 1989). As early as 1949, Peter published a much-reprinted 
collection of photographs under the title Dresden, eine Kamera klagt an (Dresden: A Camera 
Accuses). Around the same time, German “rubble films” depicting the destruction of cities in 
flashbacks became a genre of its own (Shandley 2001). In 1952, Axel Rodenberger’s bestselling 
memoir Der Tod von Dresden (The Death of Dresden) was published. German studies scholars 
such as Jörg Bernig (2005), Thomas Fox (2006) and Ursula Heukenkamp (2001) have offered 
overviews of the range of artistic representations of the bombing war experience, listing novels, 
memoirs, anthologies, films, poems, plays, song texts and audio recordings that have escaped the 
attention of those who claim that the air war has fallen into oblivion. Especially some of the 
novels are quite well-known and have also been translated into English, for example Horst 
Bienek’s Earth and Fire, Bruno Werner’s The Slave Ship or Hans Erich Nossack’s The End—a 
ruthless account of the 1943 bombing assault on Hamburg that has been praised even by Sebald. 
More influential have been the diaries and stories of Victor Klemperer and Elisabeth Langgässer, 
who were both German-Jewish writers. Other works are noteworthy not for the literary quality 
but for their semi-official status. An example is Erwin Strittmatter’s children’s story Tinko, 
which was first published in 1954 and became mandatory reading for school children in the 
German Democratic Republic. Interestingly, one of the most acclaimed contributions has come 
from abroad: Kurt Vonnegut’s semi-autobiographical Slaughterhouse-Five, an anti-war satire 
written by an American soldier who was held as a prisoner of war in Dresden at the time of the 
air raids. In Germany, this novel has, among other things, been adapted as an opera that 
premiered in Munich in 1996. 

Thus, what we have seen after the war was not a taboo on the remembrance of suffering 
but rather an irrepressible zeal to give meaning to the harrowing experiences of the recent past. 
Ulrike Heukenkamp has observed that writers often did not use a vivid, authentic language to 
describe the experience of being bombed, not because they forgot what had happened, but 
because part of that experience was a sense of panic, of emptiness, of loss of self that led authors 
to use clichéd metaphors such as “hell,” “inferno” or “Judgment Day” to fix the meaning of the 
bombings (Heukenkamp 2001: 470-72). She also points out that talking was less easy for the 
civilian survivors of the bombing war than for the exhausted, defeated and disillusioned soldiers 

 

161

who returned from the front lines of what they saw as the “real” war. The soldiers were often 
compulsively loquacious and have left detailed descriptions of their war experiences in the 
memories of families as well as in literary texts. To the extent it was real, the silencing of civilian 
bombing victims, a majority of them being women, was the result of the restoration of the 
patriarchal family order in which men decided about what counts as an experience worth telling 
and transmitting (Heukenkamp 2001: 470). 

Apart from the perceived lack of authenticity in literary representations and the 

dominance of the memory of front soldiers over the memory of women there is a third factor that 
has contributed to the notion of silence surrounding the human consequences of the bombing 
war. West Germans, in particular, were eager to rebuild their cities and their economy and felt 
that they had no time to look back. Sebald mentions “the unquestioning heroism with which 
people immediately set about the task of clearance and reorganization” (Sebald 2004: 5). This is 
something very different from a taboo although it may as well have had a silencing effect on 
memories. In this context, it is interesting to note that the German will to reconstruction, which 
in West Germany came close to an industrial ethic of high-performance fanaticism, bore a 
striking resemblance to the pioneer ethos of Israel. As José Brunner writes, “Hundreds of 
thousands of Jewish Holocaust survivors found, when they reached Israel after the war, that the 
pioneer-warrior ethos of the Jewish state left them no room to voice their suffering in the public 
sphere” (Brunner 2007: 105). Nobody would claim that there was a taboo on remembering the 
Holocaust in Israel. Yet, as this example illustrates, material and ethical imperatives can have the 
same consequence of restricting the ways in which collectivities remember their own painful 
past. 

That the immense suffering caused by incendiaries and high-explosive bombs dropped 

from the sky was not forgotten does not imply that this particular memory fit easily into a larger, 
agreed-upon frame of public remembrance of World War II. In fact, all the controversies and 
struggles in recent decades have been about this problem: how to insert the memory of the air 
war into the larger process of meaning-making in a way that is in harmony with the self-
description of Germany as a liberal Western democracy. Before we delve into some of the 
political struggles over the memory of the bombings, we want to outline the memory matrix that 
has guided activists and audiences in their attempts to represent those occurrences as broadly 
meaningful and significant. 

We suggest distinguishing four basic positions in recent German memory struggles. 

Three of these positions share the implicit assumption that there was no alternative to the defeat 
of Germany and the Axis Powers by the combined military forces of the Allies. Obviously, neo-
Nazis beg to differ on this point. But we are not aware of a position saying that the German 
people was able or willing to overthrow the government of Hitler on its own. There is thus a 
widely shared conviction that Germany had to be defeated militarily. Let us call this the 
“Carthage must be destroyed” consensus. A classical early statement of this consensus can be 
found in the preface to the first edition of Franz Neumann’s Behemoth: “A military defeat is 
necessary … More and better planes, tanks, and guns and a complete military defeat will uproot 
National Socialism from the mind of the German people” (Neumann 1942: ix). Note that 
Neumann wrote before the emergence of a transnational Holocaust trauma which in retrospect 
has made the imperative to destroy Nazi Germany by military means even more compelling. 
Today, German historians and democratic politicians across the board basically agree on the 
connection that existed between defeating Germany and ending the mass extermination of Jews 
and others groups (see, e.g., Nolte 2008; see also White 2002). Differences among the following 

 

162

first three discursive positions emerge only against the backdrop of this taken-for-granted 
consensus. The fourth position is an outlier, at least for now. 

A just-war position has been articulated by military historians in Britain and the United 

States, and continues to influence in particular left-wing memory activists in Germany to this 
day. This position states that the air bombing of German cities contributed to the defeat of 
National Socialism and was therefore by definition legitimate.145 

The moderate anti-Machiavellian position says that in pursuing highly legitimate war 
aims the Allies employed illegimate means such as the indiscriminate bombing of entire cities. 
Moderate anti-Machiavellians usually refrain from using the term “crime” to describe the 
bombings. They are often members of the liberal academic and political elites in Germany, and 
have called for reconciliation and for strengthening international humanitarian law.146 

A radicalization of the anti-Machiavellian position can be observed among those groups 

who claim that the air bombing of cities did not serve its alleged military purpose. There has 
been, it is argued, a growing disjuncture between ends and means in the final stages of the war. 
Radical anti-Machiavellians use the term “crime” to describe the bombings. Yet these groups, 
too, call for reconciliation and for a moralization of international affairs that goes beyond legal 
reforms.147 

A revisionist right-wing position has been adopted by those who claim that the bombings 

were not meant to serve a limited military purpose but were launched to commit genocidal 
crimes against the Germans. These groups, some of which should be called neo-Nazis, are 
against reconciliation with the former victors, and in favor of bringing them to what they call 
“justice.” 

The foundational moment and organizing principle of this memory matrix is the 

Holocaust. Although the notion that the bombing of cities might appear legitimate, given the 
unrelenting aggressiveness of Nazi Germany, had been formulated earlier, as the example of 
Neumann shows, knowledge about the unprecedented crimes committed in Auschwitz or 
Treblinka dramatically propelled this argument. In fact, the split that divides the memory matrix 
between those who acknowledge the military necessity of pain inflicted upon civilians (if to 
different degrees) and those who indiscriminately reject the air bombings as crimes is congruous 
with the cleavage between those who in principle acknowledge German responsibility for the 
consequences of the Holocaust and those who deny it. Our argument in the following sections is 
                                                 
145 See, e.g., US Air Force Historical Division, “Historical Analysis of the 14-15 February 1945 Bombings of 
Dresden.” Available at: http://www.airforcehistory.hq.af.mil/PopTopics/dresden.htm. The case for the effectiveness 
of the Allied bombing campaign has been made, for example, by Gregor (2000). Rolf-Dieter Müller (2004: 229) of 
the German Military History Research Institute reckons that the air attacks have shortened the war by at least one or 
two years. 
146 The origins of the anti-Machiavellian position can be found in the moral scruples that surfaced in internal debates 
in Britain itself during the war, as Sebald (2004: 14-15) has indicated. For details, see Taylor (2004: 360-66, 376-
79). 
147 German military historians seem to waver between moderate and radical anti-Machiavellian positions. In a 
landmark publication, Müller (2004: 231) speaks of “transgressions” during the Allied bombing campaigns, but 
rejects the term “crime.” Yet the multi-volume history of World War II edited by his research institute concludes 
that the area bombings “massively violated traditional notions of morality” and were a “crime against humaneness 
[Verbrechen gegen die Menschlichkeit],” although not unambiguously illegal in terms of international customary 
law; in light of the ultimate goal, they were much less effective than the destruction of “key industries and militarily 
relevant target groups” (Boog 2008: 874-76). 

 

163

therefore that the memory of the air war on German cities is closely intertwined with struggles 
over the representation of the Nazi past, and in particular of the Holocaust. 

 

The Bombing of Hamburg and the Rise of the Holocaust Trauma 

There can be no doubt that individual experiences of being injured, raped or bombed-out 
as well as the overwhelming collective experience of the military defeat of Germany led, like all 
military defeats in history, to “a complete crushing of self-confidence” (Clausewitz 1976: 255) of 
the vanquished population. As a result, many people, not only Nazi leaders who acted out of a 
warped sense of honor, committed suicide (Evans 2009: 731-32). This was, of course, an option 
only for a small minority. Another small minority was mentally prepared to absorb the news of 
the “ignominy of the concentration camps,” as it was called in October 1945 in the headlines of a 
widely circulating illustrated magazine in Berlin (Kil 1989: 13). The vast majority of Germans, 
however, was occupied with the tasks of surviving and did not care about the past. At this 
juncture in history, it was by no means clear how future generations of Germans (and others) 
would later remember, narrate, and make sense of the war and the unprecedented destruction and 
suffering it brought upon the world. In spite of the vacuum of meaning Germans found 
themselves in there was not a situation in which the Allies could have simply impressed lessons 
and memories on the mind of the German public. Much depended on how Germans themselves 
would begin to represent and remember their past, including their own experiences during the 
war.  

Let us look first at the example of the port city of Hamburg and the evolving collective 

memory of its bombing. Hamburg suffered one of the most devastating air raids in the entire war 
on Nazi Germany when the British Bomber Command under General Sir Arthur Harris launched 
“Operation Gomorrah” on July 24, 1943. This attack consisted of a coordinated series of “city-
busting” night raids, which were supplemented by a smaller number of US Air Force daylight 
raids against shipyards and submarine pens. Altogether, more than thirty-four thousand people 
were killed within a couple of days (Thiessen 2007: 12). 

Explicitly taking issue with Sebald, the young German historian Malte Thiessen has 

demonstrated that the postwar memory of the bombing raids, far from being suppressed, served 
in fact as an important symbolic resource for recreating a new sense of togetherness and local 
pride among the citizens of Hamburg. While immediately after the war even democratically 
elected officials continued to use Nazi propaganda terms such as “air terror [Luftterror]” 
(Thiessen 2007: 98) to characterize the bombings, the perpetrator-centered frame was quickly 
replaced by an almost exclusive focus on victims. From early on, political representatives from 
all parties, including the Communist Party, called for mourning a generously defined group of 
victims which included all the civilians killed by bombs, but also German soldiers and the 
inmates of Hamburg’s concentration camp in Neuengamme, where many more people were 
killed than in Operation Gomorrah (about fifty thousand). Significantly, this emotional and 
semantic shift from the accusation of perpetrators to the mourning of victims was in no way 
driven by the British occupying forces in Hamburg, although the German desire to regain a 
minimum of recognition and good will from their former enemies played a role (Thiessen 2007: 
176-77).148 What is also important is that most Hamburgers did not harbor any resentment 
toward Britons, a fact that was already noted by Nossack, who was an eyewitness to the air raids 
                                                 
148 On this subject of “memory diplomacy” see Etheridge (2008), who focuses on private and public actors in both 
West Germany and the United States in the 1950s, and their converging interests in constructing favorable 
“prosthetic” memories of Germany. 

 

164

(Nossack 2004: 34; see also Evans 2009: 466). A perpetrator-centered framing of the bombings 
would therefore not have resonated with the public. 

At the local level at least, a vibrant culture of remembrance emerged that garnered 

significant public attention. Unsurprisingly, the early memory of the air war was constructed in 
such a way as to suppress simmering collective feelings of guilt. Germans defined themselves as 
victims not just of the bombing assault and other horrors, but also as victims of the “hypnotic 
influence” of Hitler, as a former mayor of Hamburg has put it (quoted in Thiessen 2007: 109). 
What is indeed surprising and unsettling is that apparently there has not been a one-directional 
movement toward enlarging the circle of victims to be mourned. Thiessen (2007: 173-74) shows 
that until 1950 the inmates of Neuengamme, many of whom were shot, starved to death or send 
to extermination camps in the east, were included in various commemorative performances and 
discourses, whereas later only German city dwellers were considered worth the tears and 
thoughts of Germans. This narrowing of the collective memory can be described as a 
consequence of the early cold war, which led to the marginalization of communist groups, who 
after the war had played a crucial role in keeping the memory of the concentration camps alive, 
although without any reference to what was later called the Holocaust. 

The cold war pattern of remembering with its heavy emphasis on local bombing victims 
combined with an inhibition to discuss the motives and strategies of those who were in charge of 
the air war changed with the rise of a new generation that no longer had any direct experience of 
the bombings. The new “generational memory” (Eyerman 2002: 11) began to crystallize in the 
early 1970s. For the first time, officials interpreted the bombing of their city not in the context of 
the “collapse” of the Third Reich, but as a harbinger of the “liberation” of Germany (Thiessen 
2007: 203, 388). This new moral term immediately brought back the memory of Neuengamme, a 
memory which at that time was already embedded in a much broader narrative about the 
Holocaust. The Holocaust as a defining memory icon and signifier for what Theodor Adorno 
(1998: 89) characterized as “a horror that one hesitates to call … by name” emerged in West 
Germany only in the course of the 1970s.149 Once established, the Holocaust narrative and the 
narrative of the liberation of Germany by the Allies reinforced each other, forming a new web of 
meaning.  

In Hamburg, this shift in the mode of remembrance was to a large extent spearheaded by 

the regional Evangelical Lutheran Church whose leading representatives tried to marry two 
different narratives. The first insisted on the innocence of the German bombing victims who 
were described as having been sacrificed and even “crucified,” as the Austrian artist Oskar 
Kokoschka said, who contributed a mosaic (“Ecce Homines“) to the St Nikolai Church memorial 
in Hamburg (Thiessen 2007: 230). The second narrative represents German civilians not merely 
as victims, but also as (knowing or unknowing) accomplices to the evil that ruled Germany. In a 
speech given on the occasion of the inauguration of the memorial in 1977, the bishop of 
Hamburg reminded the audience of a plaque hanging at some distance from Kokoschka mosaic. 
The plaque reads: “Open your mouth for the mute, for the rights of all the unfortunate” (Proverbs 
31, 8). Germans, the bishop continued, did not heed the call and ignored the plight of “those 
people for which we did not open our mouth” (quoted in Thiessen 2007: 232). This way of 
                                                 
149 The Auschwitz trials in Frankfurt in 1963-65 focused the attention of the public more on the perpetrators than the 
victims. Michal Bodemann (2002) has argued that a major turning point in the perception of the Jews was the Six 
Day War in 1967 during which many Germans, including the media, sided with Israel. The Jewish state was 
compared to Prussia, and citizens in Hamburg, for example, donated blood for Israeli soldiers (see Bodemann 2002: 
48-49). 

 

165

interpreting the past gave a new twist to the perception of the bombings as some kind of divine 
“punishment,” – a perception that was already prevalent among some eyewitnesses (Nossack 
2004: 12-14). 

Occasionally, this dual innovation of representing the perpetrators of the air war as also 

being liberators, and the victims as also being accomplices of the same forces Germany had to be 
liberated from, took the form of what we have called the just-war position. For instance, in 1993 
the editor of the influential liberal weekly Die Zeit, Gerd Bucerius, described his jubilant mood 
at the sight and sound of the bomber squadrons. “‘Finally,’ I kept shouting, ‘finally.’ In my view, 
the Allied had waited much too long before battling the world’s enemy Hitler” (quoted in 
Thiessen 2007: 327). To be true, this was quite an exceptional statement that did not resonate 
with many in Bucerius’ generation. To the contrary, the new mode of remembering the war 
tended to alienate sections of the older generations of Hamburgers, some of which voiced their 
anger and bitterness in the local media (Thiessen 2007: 334). While these voices were losing 
influence in the ongoing memory struggles, other voices made sure that the bombing-as-
liberation narrative began to slowly disintegrate. At no point, however, did this disintegration 
affect the memory of the Holocaust which was rather increasingly consolidated as iconic and 
indisputable. Until the late 1980s we still find the vocabulary of liberation in the official 
language, usually attenuated by what we have identified as the moderate anti-Machiavellian 
position. Yet throughout these years the liberation motif had to compete with a radicalization of 
anti-Machiavellian positions whose advocates claimed that the air war was not an immoral 
means to a moral end, but did not contribute at all to the moral end of defeating Nazi Germany 
(see Thiessen 2007: 272-73, 400, 406).  

As a result of these trends, the post-reunification period after 1990 offers a mixed picture. 

Partly in response to the contextualization of the air war and the enlargement of the circle of 
victims who have been included in the collective memory, public intellectuals and the media 
rediscovered the “taboo” on remembering German bombing victims. Since then, the term 
“taboo” has been used in different ways. Some usages are benign. Sebald, for example, only 
wanted writers to express themselves in an adequate language, and the public to be aware of the 
horrible things that happened on the ground as a result of the bombings (people getting stuck in 
the melting tar while trying to run away from the firestorm, etc.). More often, however, the 
interjection of “taboo” into controversies over collective memory is an expression of resentment 
against the inclusion of non-German victims in the collective memory, and a response to the 
growing difficulties of constructing an imagined homogeneous community of victims out of the 
ruins left behind by the Royal Air Force. 

Furthermore, the “taboo” vocabulary is paralleled by a return of the “terror” vocabulary. 
This is a direct consequence of the radicalization of the anti-Machiavellian position toward the 
bombing war. Once it is believed that the bombings did not serve any intelligible military 
purpose, the term “terror” is bound to seep back into public discourse. The terror vocabulary is 
also a response to the consolidation of the Holocaust trauma which has made it even less 
legitimate to criticize the ultimate goal of Allied war effort than in the first decades after the war. 
Once the Holocaust was memorialized as “sacred-evil” (Alexander 2003: 50), victory over its 
perpetrators became sacred too. Thus, if Germans wish to avoid being symbolically polluted by 
the evil of the Holocaust, they have to phrase their opposition to the war by rejecting the means 
chosen by the Allies, or by questioning the relations of means and ends. This is precisely what 
happened in the 1980s in Hamburg’s tabloid papers and later in national mainstream media such 
as the news magazine Der Spiegel which in January 2003 published a series of articles on the 

 

166

 

The Air War as Bridging Metaphor 

“terror attacks against Germany,” calling the assaults on Hamburg and Dresden “climaxes of 
Luftterror” (Thiessen 2007: 400-1). 

Although these terms are taken straight out of the dictionary of the Nazi Ministry of 

Propaganda, we wish to emphasize that the recent critique of the Allied “air terror” has 
undergone a largely successful process of semantic de-Nazification in the sense that it is no 
longer part of a strategy to create a harmonious community of heroic sufferers based on the 
radical exclusion of the Other. The indictment of the Western Allies as perpetrators of terror 
attacks has not weakened the desire of the city of Hamburg, the vast majority of Germans and 
mainstream media to be on most friendly terms with the alleged perpetrator nations, and to be 
recognized as a member in good standing of the Western Alliance and the European Union. The 
return of a perpetrator-centered frame focusing on the “terror” spread by the Allies did not, for 
example, affect the planning for the fiftieth anniversary of Operation Gomorrah in 1994, which 
was organized in close coordination with the British Ambassador to Germany in a “spirit of 
peace, reconciliation and friendship,” as the mayor of Hamburg was eager to emphasize. When 
Prince Charles of Wales gave an appropriately fair-minded and conciliatory speech at the 
commemoration, about thirty thousand enthusiastic Hamburgers gathered to celebrate him, 
waving small Union Jack flags and wearing “Prince Charles” buttons (Thiessen 2007: 372-74).  

Over the last decades, the Allied bombing war on German cities became included in the 
national and collective memory as a horrific and evil event whose relation to the morally worthy 
ends of the war remains controversial. The moral content of the bombing symbol is thus still 
contested. Scholars and citizens continue to debate whether the bombings were a necessary evil 
or a crime, and whether it happened to innocents or to bystanders and accomplices to another 
horrific and evil event, which is the Holocaust. There is a much controversy about the ranking of 
evils: for most Germans the air war, unlike the Holocaust, is far from achieving the status of a 
sacred evil. Still, even as a comparatively weak symbol of evil the bombings serve a moral 
function. Whenever the media report about the air bombing of other places in other wars, 
Germans tend to respond to such cues by remembering the bombing of their own cities. The 
German perception of the 1991 Second Persian Gulf War, code-named “Operation Desert 
Storm,” is a case in point.  

When the US-led coalition launched a massive air campaign against Iraq on January 17, 
1991, many Germans drew an analogy between Germany’s past and Iraq’s present. For instance, 
visitors to the town of Giessen near Frankfurt (where one of the authors of this paper happened 
to study at that time) could see messages sprayed on official city signs that read “Giessen = 
Baghdad.” During World War II, Giessen offered many industrial targets and was an important 
link in the German transport system, which is the reason why the city was bombed and almost 
completely destroyed on the night of December 6, 1944, by American B-17 bombers. 

The sprayed message in Giessen was symptomatic for a much broader phenomenon that 

was new at least in the Western part of the country. Several voices from the peace movement 
against the Gulf War employed allusions to the German experience of being bombed by the 
Western Allies as a “bridging metaphor” (Alexander 2003: 67-76) to make sense of and mobilize 
against the Iraq war. There had of course been other American air wars before, most notably the 
Vietnam War, which was also opposed on a global scale. However the public controversy over 
the Vietnam War unfolded without any appropriation of specifically German war memories. 
Indeed, the perception of this particular war was still (or already) shaped by the fundamental 

 

167

perpetrator/liberator ambiguity that was about to dominate the public discourse on the World 
War II bombings of German cities. Artworks such as Wolf Vostell’s Pop-art collage “Lipstick 
bomber” gave expression to this ambiguity which was later completely erased by the German 
peace movement. 

 
[insert “Lipstick bomber”] 
 
Voices from the peace movement of the early 1990s varied considerably with regard to 

their level of reflexivity and elaborateness, and did by no means amount to a coherent ideological 
position. Still, in hindsight the peace movement turned out to be a political actor whose 
contribution to the ongoing process of German memory-making has been much more salient than 
its effects on global politics, although spokespersons of the movement attempted to combine 
precisely these two areas. The popular psychoanalyst Horst-Eberhard Richter, for example, 
argued that Germany had a special right and duty to push for strictly pacifist policies in the 
international arena because this country had been the source as well as the site of mass atrocities 
during World War II. Although the bombing of German cities did not figure explicitly in his 
argument, Richter gave a telling list of impressions about what he perceived to be the immediate 
results of the Gulf War: “The enormity of the sacrifice in blood of soldiers and civilians, the 
misery of those who have been bombed out as well of hundreds of thousands of refugees, the 
destruction of cities and the landscape, the poisoning of the sea and the toxic oil well plumes 
engulfing hundreds of kilometers“ (Richter 1991: 15). Reading such descriptions it is hard to 
miss the vague similarity with accounts of what happened to Germany during World War II. This 
vagueness and ambiguity of Richter’s lament was symptomatic for many other texts published in 
the context of the peace movement at that time. 

What is most striking in Richter’s account is the blurring of the distinction between 

victims and perpetrators in the context of the Holocaust and World War II. On the one hand, he 
clearly distances himself from any attempt to questioning the historical guilt and the political 
responsibility of Germans for the Holocaust; on the other hand he uses German war memories to 
seize the moral high ground for Germany as an international actor. Because Germans have 
suffered so much, so the argument goes, they are uniquely well-positioned to speak up against 
any war, whereas those who have suffered less are still caught up in nationalist and militaristic 
mindsets. From the memories of German suffering and victimhood Richter distils a spirit of 
moral superiority that distinguishes Germany from other, allegedly more traditional nations. The 
implication of this rhetorical move is that the blurring of the line between victims and 
perpetrators is matched by an equally problematic blurring of “temporal and spatial boundaries,” 
as Andreas Huyssen (2003: 163) has pointed out. Like many other Germans, members of the 
peace movement continued to define their identity largely in temporal terms, based on the 
difference between the democratic present and an ominous, highly charged, anti-democratic past. 
At the same time, however, this repudiation of the past was spatialized and turned into a 
rejection of contemporary nations such as, in particular, the United States of America.150 
                                                 
150 The arbitrariness of these rhetorical stances became obvious when in 1999 the German government successfully 
enacted a reversal of the analogical framework introduced by the peace movement by deciding to join the Kosovo 
intervention on the ground that Serbia was planning a “second Auschwitz” against Kosovo Albanians. Here again 
we saw the spatial localization of an evil retrieved from the collective memory and projected onto a real place which 
then was bombed by the German Air Force and others (see Heins 2007). 

 

168

Our reading of the ambiguities of the German peace movement was already reflected by 

some of the protagonists themselves who felt that the movement was maneuvering in murky 
waters. Thus, Jörn Böhme, who had been an activist of the peace movement in the 1980s, argued 
that the attitudes of the German left, and in particular the peace movement, during the Gulf War 
were fraught with “dilemmas” (Böhme 1991: 215) of the kind discussed above. Every attempt to 
define an unambiguous pacifist position in Germany, Böhme argued, was marred by an 
unconscious desire to escape those dilemmas. While mapping out a complex field of mutually 
contradictory loyalties and self-canceling positions, he also mentioned the memory of the air 
war, wondering “to what extent the bombing of Dresden and other cities has been tabooed 
among young Germans, on the ground that the older generation used Dresden to repress 
Auschwitz, with the consequence that now perhaps the lack of mourning is projected collectively 
on the people of Iraq as an innocent victim of ‘the Allies’” (Böhme 1991: 223). Similarly, Gert 
Schäfer interpreted the discourse of the peace movement in terms of a “return of the repressed.“ 
In a much-quoted essay he noted that “after a long time I heard once again every single air plane, 
a noise that is normally submerged in the sounds of everyday life. Memories of bombers and 
attacks by low-flying aircraft returned, memories of nights spent in bomb shelters, of fires, 
debris, dead people and my child gas mask” (Schäfer 1992: 9). It is important to stress that both 
Böhme and Schäfer talk about the memories of the bombings in strictly psychological, non-
constructivist terms of a “return of the repressed.” This is significant because the intrusion of 
bombing memories into the public discourse it not described as the result of a lifting of a 
communicative taboo, but as the result of an allegedly natural psychic dynamic. 

We reject this interpretation as much as we have rejected the taboo thesis. As far as the 
public sphere is concerned, memories of the bombing of German cities did not “return” like a 
jack-in-the-box jumping at us. Rather, these memories were consciously revived by activists, 
although under inherited symbolic circumstances shaped by previous memory projects. In the 
early 1980s, for example, activists and the media began to circulate the slogan of the “nuclear 
holocaust” (Thiessen 2007: 256) to associate the memory of the destruction of Hamburg and 
other cities with two other evils at once: the cold war threat of nuclear war, and the systematic 
extermination of the European Jews captured by the rising Holocaust symbol. In this case the 
resurrection of the memory of the air war was short-lived: it vanished together with the Soviet 
Union and the cold war constellation, which again makes clear that it is misleading to speak of a 
past forcing itself onto the present.  

We conclude that Dan Diner (1991) was probably right when he interpreted the protests 

against the Gulf War as an expression of both continuity and change in the parameters of 
political protest in post-reunification Germany. On the one hand, he commended the peace 
movement, not the least for the ability of some of its representatives to reflect upon the 
movement’s inherent anti-American ideological grounding. On the other hand, he was concerned 
about what began to take shape as an effort to mobilize memories of German victimhood in the 
protest against the US campaign in Iraq, a campaign that should have been judged and criticized 
on its own terms. In 1990 and 1991 this mobilization was still very much dominated by the 
ideological debates within the West German left and the peace movement that grew out of it 
(Böhme 1991; Kloke 2007). Twelve years later, on the occasion of the protests against yet 
another US-led war in Iraq, however, the memory symbol of “Dresden” could no longer be 
found occupying a particular position at one end of the ideological left-right spectrum. In 
hindsight, the German peace movement has indeed earned the dubious credit of having turned 
the bombing war on Germany into a free-floating symbol that allowed the public to understand 

 

169

and rally against the successors of the same Allies which had devastated, but also liberated 
Germany in World War II.  

At the same time, though, this symbol, precisely because it is free-floating, should not be 
regarded as pointing toward an underlying cultural trauma, because it is not really connected to 
issues of collective identity. Memories can be mobilized in conflicts over the self-definition of 
the collectivity as well as referred to in struggles over resources that have no inner connection to 
the issues resurrected from memory (Langenohl 2001). Although most conflicts over memory 
have both a strategic and an identity dimension, from the point of view of cultural trauma theory 
the crucial question is whether memory offers a narrative that is directed toward the in-group in 
such a way as to shape its collective identity (Eyerman 2002: 70). If that is not the case, a 
memory may still serve as a symbolic capital of sorts that is used to win over an audience for a 
particular cause. The “achievement” of the peace movement has been the creation of a token of 
symbolic capital out of the memory of the bombings which now can be used for the public 
dramatization of issues and for adding moral weight to political arguments and positions, but 
which cannot be regarded as having any identity-constitutive meaning of its own.  

 

Dresden and the Clash of Memories 

More consequential for German memory struggles than any American-led war in recent 

decades has been the reunification of Germany itself. To be sure, this event did not 
fundamentally reconfigure what we have called the bombing war memory matrix. In fact, the 
institutionalization of the Holocaust trauma continued. More memorials to Nazi crimes were 
unveiled, the most spectacular of them being the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe in 
central Berlin which was inaugurated and opened to the public in 2005. Also, empirical research 
shows that contemporary Germans of all age groups continue to identify Nazism with evil and 
recognize the Holocaust as “the superlative historical genocide” (Langenbacher 2008: 65). At the 
same time, however, the inclusion of the former German Democratic Republic strengthened 
certain forces and trends that were already visible in West Germany. In the communist East, the 
memory of the bombing war was omnipresent and consciously evoked by the state. Many cities 
bore the scars of the war into the 1980s, with wastelands of rubble and facades of buildings 
pockmarked by bullet holes that served as constant reminders of the past. While the relative 
slowness of reconstruction made sure that popular war memories would linger on, the official 
public discourse politicized those memories in accordance with the binary cold war logic. 

From the mid-1950s onward the East German discourse on the bombing of Germany 

focused on the eastern city of Dresden which was destroyed on February 13 and 14, 1945, by a 
highly controversial air campaign called “Operation Thunderclap.” The bombing of Dresden was 
the most catastrophic attack on a German city since Hamburg. Twenty-five thousand people 
were killed, most of them in the first two out of three night raids carried out by British bombers. 
Dresden had been a city that prided itself for her rich culture, but also a Nazi stronghold and an 
important hub for moving military personnel and supplies to the east. Because of its strategic 
position, the campaign was planned in London as a way to ease the Red Army’s advance in 
Germany (Taylor 2004: 190-92). However, from our perspective, the most interesting aspect of 
this unforgotten campaign does not lie in such empirical details. The intriguing phenomenon is 
rather that the bombing almost instantly morphed from a military fact into a powerful moral 
signifier of evil. As the British historian Frederick Taylor (2004: 372) writes, the destruction of 
Dresden began “to exercise an independent power of its own, one that could not but affect the 
Allies’ claims to absolute moral superiority.” According to Taylor, this transformation must 

 

170

partly be credited to the efforts of Joseph Goebbels and his Ministry of Propaganda that lost no 
time manipulating the figure of dead (by adding a zero) and denouncing the raids as a 
“barbarian” terror attack on an innocent city that represented the epitome of European “culture” 
without having any military value. 

Much of this straightforward coding of the events survived the end of Nazism with only 
minor permutations. Intellectuals and the government of East Germany offered a narrative of the 
bombing of Dresden that was based on a small set of symbolic equivalences between the 
National Socialism and the Western Allies. The perpetrators of the bombings were analogically 
associated with the Nazis, and victims were represented in analogy to the victims of Nazism 
(although the Jews were not named). East Germans also perpetuated the myth of the innocence 
of Dresden as a place of no military or industrial importance where people loved the arts and 
kept themselves aloof from the demands of politics. Hence the trope of the “senselessness” of the 
air raids (see, e.g., Kil 1989: 19). For cold war propaganda purposes the attackers were also 
called “Anglo-Americans,” although in this particular case the US Air Force had only been a 
junior partner in a largely British and Commonwealth operation. However, the role of the United 
States was seen as particularly frightening in light of the even worse fate that could have befallen 
Dresden: becoming the target of the first atomic bomb. According to a widely believed story line 
offered by communist party intellectuals, this possibility was thwarted only by the fast advancing 
Red Army, which saved the people of Dresden. Although empirically unsubstantiated, this 
doomsday scenario became a center piece of the East German collective memory of the air war 
(Taylor 2004: 454-56; Widera 2005).  

In short, the East German discourse lifted the assault on Dresden out of the overall 
context of the war, invested it with immense moral significance and created a salvationary 
narrative that idolized the Red Army while polluting the British and American air forces as 
apocalyptically evil. 

    Anglo-American air forces 
    Perpetrators 
    Barbarism 
    Capitalism 
    war mongering 
    threatening annihilation 

 
Dresden 
 
Victim  
 
Culture 
 
Communism 
 
peace loving    
saved by Red Army 
 
After reunification, this narrative entered the mainstream of German public culture, 
where some of its aspects such as the savior role attributed to the Soviet Union have been 
submerged, while other aspects have affected the collective memory. It is worth noting, though, 
that the East German discourse did not contradict the core assumption of the West German 
memory matrix that Germany had to be liberated by foreign armies. On the other hand, the 
Holocaust did not figure prominently, if at all, in East German memory. The place of the sacred-
evil remained empty in East Germany, even if the communist propaganda tried for some time to 
assign this place to the imperialist West. Yet this assignment was predicated on the changing 
geopolitical situation and was thus inherently unstable.151 The atomic bomb also might have 
been a candidate, but since the Soviet Union also maintained a considerable nuclear arsenal, only 
                                                 
151 As the cold war was winding down in the 1980s, East German historians like Olaf Groehler softened their 
critique of the Allied bombing considerably (see Fox 2006). 

 

171

the actual dropping of two bombs by the US Air Force over Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 
1945 could be referred to as epitomizing modern evil. This, however, was a much weaker 
d 
symbol than the Holocaust, and did not lead to consequential institutional changes in society an
state. The survivors of the nuclear attack were not supported in any concrete way nor did Japan 
as a victim nation play a particular role in communist foreign policy. East Germany is also not 
known for ever having opposed nuclear weapon

s as such. 

If East German public discourses after reunification did not radically disrupt the matrix 
underlying the remembrance of the bombing war, how did they affect collective memory and 
practices of commemoration as well as the chances for constructing a cultural trauma? To find a 
preliminary answer, we now turn briefly to the ways in which the destruction of Dresden has 
been commemorated in recent times in Dresden itself. 

After reunification, both Dresden and the province of Saxony, of which Dresden is the 

regional capital city, were governed by the liberal-conservative Christian Democratic Party 
(CDU). The new ruling political elite was, of course, determined to promote reconciliation with 
the West, and made sure that the annual commemoration was organized and scripted 
accordingly. One of the early steps taken by the city of Dresden was the decision of reconstruct 
the eighteenth-century Lutheran Frauenkirche (Church of Our Lady). This decision was 
controversial because the heap of ruins to which the cathedral had been reduced by the 1945 air 
raids was conserved under communist rule as a war memorial, similar to the ruins of Coventry 
Cathedral in England which was destroyed by German bombers. Supporters of the 
reconstruction, who were aware that the removal of the ruins would be interpreted by some as a 
“sacrilege” (Blaschke 1990), nevertheless argued that it was more important to allow people to 
forget and to leave behind the horrors of the past of which the dark stones of the ruins were a 
vivid reminder. 

Today, the reopened cathedral is being touted by German as well as British 

representatives as a transnational symbol of “reconciliation” between former enemies. 
“Reconciliation” is indeed one of the key words of a commemorative discourse that no longer 
differs significantly from the discourse on the bombing of Hamburg. In both cities we have seen 
two different narratives of the air war in recent years, one that describes the air raids as a symbol 
of the madness of war in general, or even as a symbol of the destructiveness of modernity as 
such. A former mayor of Dresden, for example, used the rhetorical device of metonymy to 
contextualize the memory of the bombing. The attack on Dresden was said to be “senseless” and 
“barbarian,” but no more senseless and barbarian than “the entire war,” which was started by 
Germany before taking on a life of its own.152 This narrative amalgamates the different tactics 
and strategies used by the Allied and the Axis Powers, as well as their human consequences, into 
one single emblem of absurdity. In 2005, the city held an event where messages written by 
victims of war from Dresden, Baghdad, Guernica, New York, Hiroshima, Grozny and other 
places were read out in public to evoke the idea of a global “community of victims.” Around the 
same time, the mayor of Hamburg gave a commemorative speech in which he interpreted the 
firebombing of his city not as a consequence of decisions taken by countries which had been 
attacked before, but as the result of a breach of “the dams of our civilization” that led Europe to 
abandon herself to the destructive potentials of technology and modernity (quoted in Thiessen 
2007: 421-22; for the “dams of civilization” metaphor see Freud 1905: 178). To the extent that it 
 
                                                
152 Address by Ingolf Rossberg, Dresden, February 13, 2006 (on file with authors). 

 

172

radically downplays the role of agency and responsibility in modern society, this narrative could 
be called postmodern. 

At the same time, there is a second narrative centered on the conviction that historical 

occurrences such as the bombing of cities should be explained not as expressions of a self-
propelling modernity that got out of control, but as consequences of motivated human action. 
Since the 1980s much of the memory work done in Hamburg, for example, has been inspired by 
a causal story which regarded Nazi Germany as the source of a violence that finally 
boomeranged. Hosea 8, 7—“For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind”—
was therefore a much quoted reference. This way of distributing causal and moral responsibilities 
across different actors is by no means alien to the public discourse in Dresden. In February 2009, 
Helma Orosz, who had been elected mayor only a few months ago, addressed a crowd at the city 
center emphasizing that “Like Dresden, thousands of other human places had to sink to ashes 
before the criminal Nazi racket that started the war could be stopped.”153 The day before, she 
gave a speech at the Heidefriedhof (Heath Cemetery) in Dresden where many of the remains of 
the bombing victims are buried, insisting that “It was Germany who forced the nations attacked 
by her to fight back in a life and death struggle.”154 Other representatives of the city have called 
upon the citizens to remember their former Jewish fellow-citizens who were persecuted and 
deported from Dresden like everywhere else in German-ruled territories. Recalling specifically 
the fate of Victor Klemperer, a Jewish citizen and professor of literature who survived the Nazi 
period in hiding, former mayor Lutz Vogel mentioned that Klemperer had barely escaped 
Hitler’s henchmen: “The air raid on February 13, 1945, had saved his life!”155 Civic groups 
including a survivors’ association have also invoked the double image of German civilians as 
victims/accomplices, which corresponds to the perpetrator/liberator ambiguity in the perception 
of the Allies including their bomber pilots.156 

The crucial difference between East and West, Dresden and Hamburg, can be gleaned 

from the fact that there is virtually no commemorative speech by a democratic politician in 
Dresden that does not address the pervasive counter-discourse produced by extreme right-wing 
groups in society and their political parties. At the heart of this memory discourse is no longer 
what Adorno (1998: 90) ridiculed as the “quite common move of drawing up a balance sheet of 
guilt …, as though Dresden compensated for Auschwitz.” Instead of only minimizing the 
Holocaust by pointing to alleged crimes of the Allies, the new revisionist discourse directly 
analogizes “Dresden” to the Holocaust by calling the Allied bombing of German cities a 
“bombing holocaust.” This new trope has the advantage of not denying the Holocaust (which is a 
criminal offense in Germany) but rather treating it as a floating signifier that becomes truly 
meaningful only when attached to the memories of the air war. The career of the “bombing 
holocaust” trope can partly be traced back to Jörg Friedrich’s bestselling book The Fire: The 
Bombing of Germany, 1940-1945, in which the author establishes two equivalences: he calls the 
British Bomber Command and the aircrews dropping bombs over Germany “Einsatzgruppen“—
the official name of the German death squads who rounded up and killed Jews and other groups 
                                                 
153 Speech by Helma Orosz, Altmarkt Dresden, February 14, 2009 (on file with authors). 
154 Speech by Helma Orosz, Heidefriedhof Dresden, February 13, 2009 (on file with authors). 
155 Speech by Lutz Vogel, First Mayor, Neumarkt Dresden, February 13, 2008 (on file with authors). 
156 “At the same time the history of the city shows the co-responsibility also of the citizens of Dresden for the 
inhumane, criminal policies of the National Socialist power holders,” says the mission statement of a group of local 
history activists called “13 February 1945.” 

 

173

throughout Europe; and he equates the basements where people died during the air attacks 
“crematoria” (Friedrich 2006). Still, Friedrich does not see himself as a right-wing author. He 
believes that the Allied air war was a unique crime and should not be compared to more recent 
American wars. Thus, while drawing an analogy between the Holocaust—the systematic 
extermination of a people which was stigmatized as biologically defective and born evil—and 
military actions that were (rightly or wrongly) believed to contribute to the defeat of the regime 
responsible for the Holocaust, Friedrich dissociates other, more recent bombing campaigns from 
the one launched against Germany. Unlike both the peace movement and right-wing extremists 
who use the bombing memory as a tool to mobilize people against other wars fought by 
Germany’s former enemies, Friedrich mentions that he even supported the 2003 war in Iraq (see 
the “Afterword for American and British Readers” in Friedrich 2006: 483). 

 
[insert photos “bombing holocaust” etc] 
 
The right-wing manner of remembrance is passionately rejected by the democratic 
political parties as polluting the founding ideals of reunified Germany, but also of its newly 
democratized eastern provinces. It is seen as “disgracing” Dresden and “sullying the memory of 
its dead.”157 At the same time, local activists admit that the right-wing memory project resonates 
with sections of the people in Dresden. Whereas in Hamburg we have seen a notable decline of 
public controversies over the meaning of the air raids on the city as well as over the appropriate 
mode of remembering them (Thiessen 2007: 457), Dresden has become a veritable cauldron of 
memory wars. In 2009, the annual “commemorative march” organized by local right-wing 
extremists attracted more than 6,000 like-minded people from all over Germany and some 
neighboring countries. Even official events held by the city of Dresden are dominated by these 
groups. Their countless wreaths, for example, completely drown out the wreaths laid by ordinary 
citizens or German and British dignitaries at the Heath Cemetery. In the past, some invited 
British guests like the historian Frederick Taylor had to be protected by security guards while 
others, for example the Holocaust survivor Ruth Kluger, who is a former professor at the 
University of California, declined an invitation explaining that she could handle a bunch of right-
wing hecklers but not the sight of thousands of neo-Nazis marching on German streets. 
Unsurprisingly, this disturbing situation has triggered a cycle of counter-mobilizations by left-
wing radicals who have begun to stage their own performances on the occasion of the 
anniversary of the bombings. Some of these groups adopt a provocative, almost carnivalesque 
version of the just-war position that is perhaps best illustrated by the slogan “Bomber Harris 
Superstar—Thanks to You from the Red Antifa [Antifascist Action].” 

 
[insert photo] 
 
It is easy to understand why none of the actors involved in the annual Dresden bombing 

remembrance spectacle achieves what Alexander (2004) calls a “fused performance,” which 
would be characterized by the presence an audience identifying with the actors and by cultural 
scripts appearing to be true. Understandably, many citizens simply stay physically away from a 
scene dominated by radical memory activists from the opposite ends of the political spectrum, 
monitored by helicopters hovering over the city and kept in check by thousands of police officers 
                                                 
157 Speech by Helma Orosz, Heidefriedhof Dresden, February 13, 2009 (on file with authors). 

 

174

in riot gear. The mayor of the city of Dresden has meanwhile organized a dialogue with citizens 
about how future commemorations of the past should look like in a situation where there is little 
consensus neither about the symbolic text of the commemoration nor about the ways of 
transforming this text into a convincing and effective performance. Nothing could be more 
different from this situation of utter cluelessness than the state of affairs in Hamburg where the 
memory of Operation Gomorrah has been “normalized” (Thiessen 2007: 457) and drained of 
explosive emotions. 

 

Toward a New Cultural Trauma? 

We wish to summarize the findings of our case study with a view to some of the more 

general issues in the debate on cultural trauma. The Allied bombing of Germany offers an 
interesting test case for cultural trauma theory. The bombings clearly represent a historical 
instance of massive collective suffering that was deliberately inflicted on civilians by identifiable 
actors. There is no question that these occurrences have been traumatic in the clinical and 
psychological sense of the term. Still, memory projects attempting to translate this original 
experience into a cultural trauma have failed. The remembrance of the destruction of Hamburg, 
Dresden and many other German cities and towns does not point to an underlying cultural 
trauma that fundamentally shapes the collective identity of modern-day Germans. Rather, the 
memory of the bombing war is a function of another memory: the memory of Germany’s 
wartime atrocities including the Holocaust. 

This does not mean that the Holocaust memory has “repressed” that of the air war or put 
a “taboo” on it. Not only have images of the bombings and their human consequences “crossed 
the threshold of the national consciousness” (Sebald 2004: 11); today they are now in fact deeply 
ingrained in the political culture. Our point, however, is that the meaning of the bombing war for 
the nation cannot be established independently from memory discourses on the crimes of Nazi 
Germany. The public discourse on the bombings is not about the obvious fact that Germans, too, 
have been victims of the war; it is rather about whether they deserve a place in the sun of 
virtuous victimhood which would rule out that they have been perpetrators or accomplices to evil 
as well. Whenever Germans during World War II are obliquely represented as virtuous victims, 
we do not witness a return of repressed memories, but a strategy to exonerate Germans from 
their responsibility for the Third Reich. 

Not the memory of the air war, but the memory of the Holocaust is a cultural trauma for 

Germans (like for others). This social fact in turn constrains and conditions present and future 
memory projects. The memory matrix of the bombings is thus organized around a reference 
point external to the debate over the bombings. Political struggles over the public 
commemoration of the bombing victims, including all the historically incomprehensible 
analogies between “Dresden” and “Baghdad,” always take place in the shadow of the Holocaust 
as the negative foundational myth of contemporary Germany. 

A cultural trauma serves as filter and organizing center of political perceptions and value-
statements which in turn fuel processes of collective mobilization and identity construction. Far 
from being such a symbolic resource, the memory of the air war in Germany has been more of a 
ghost light in an ideological swamp. Of course, there is nothing about this memory that makes it 
impossible to reconstruct the facts of German suffering in such a way as to initiate a cultural 
trauma process. Alexander overrates the importance of the fact that by winning the war the Allies 
gained control over the “means of symbolic production” (Alexander 2003: 32-33) so that they 
could portray the existence of German-controlled extermination camps in a certain fashion. For 

 

175

the Allied victory did in no way guarantee that one day West Germans would accept the 
Holocaust as a defining national memory icon. Nor is there any transcendental guarantee—given 
that the means of symbolic production are quite evenly distributed today—that Germans (or 
others) will one day abandon this particular memory. However, the obstacles are formidable.  
Let us look at the example of the “bombing holocaust.” Apart from being obscene, this 

fairly successful trope highlights the fact that the same groups who deny or minimize the 
Holocaust have to refer to and affirm the Holocaust as sacred-evil in order to denounce the 
bombing of German cities. The much less extreme example of Friedrich’s The Fire also shows 
that even a drastic and simplified account of Germans as innocent victims of evil perpetrators 
draws its persuasive power from the Holocaust narrative. Far from making a first step toward 
replacing or eroding this foundational narrative, Friedrich has actually strengthened what will 
remain for a long time the central symbol of evil in the Western world.  

Obstacles to constructing a new cultural trauma abound as we move from the margins to 

the center of the public debate. A cultural trauma “demands reparation” (Eyerman 2008: 163). 
Thus, if the memory of the air war ever crystallized into a cultural trauma, Britain and, to a lesser 
extent, the United States would have to repair the damage, starting perhaps with a formal 
apology. But there is evidence that the refusal of British officials including Queen Elizabeth II to 
apologize for any bombing raid has not caused more than a minor and passing public outcry, not 
even in Dresden (Taylor 2004: 422). The situation is further complicated by the fact that leading 
German military historians such as Rolf-Dieter Müller have publicly argued that an “admission 
of guilt” on the part of Great Britain would be inappropriate; according to him, we should rather 
be “grateful” for the Allied war effort (Müller 2004: 230). The public debate about whether the 
area bombing was a “necessary” evil (given the imperative of defeating Nazi Germany) or a 
“lesser” evil (compared to a nuclear attack) is likely to continue for some more time. But there 
are no indications of a memory project that is going to replace the double image of German 
civilians as victims/accomplices, which corresponds to the perpetrator/liberator perception of the 
Allies, with the kind of polarizing discourse that is required to establish a cultural trauma. 
 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
Adorno, Theodor W. 1998. “The Meaning of Working Through the Past.” In Critical Models: 

Interventions and Catchwords, trans. Henry W. Pickford. New York: Columbia 
University Press, pp. 89-103. 

Alexander, Jeffrey C. 2003. The Meanings of Social Life: A Cultural Sociology. New York: 

Oxford University Press. 

Theory 22, no. 4: 527-573. 

Alexander, Jeffrey C. 2004. “Cultural Pragmatics Between Ritual and Strategy.” Sociological 

Bergmann, Martin S., and Milton E. Jucovy, eds. 1990. Generations of the Holocaust. New 

York: Columbia University Press. 

Bernig, Jörg 2005. Phantomschmerzen. Die Gegenwärtigkeit des Bombenkrieges gegen die 

Deutschen.” In Walter Schmitz, ed., Die Zerstörung Dresdens: Antworten der Künste. 
Dresden: Thelem 2005, pp. 3-26. 

Blaschke, Karl-Heinz 1990. “Die Trümmer des Krieges.” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 

February 13. 

 

176

Bodemann, Y. Michal 2002. “The Uncanny Clatter: The Holocaust in Germany before Its Mass 
Commemoration.” In Dan Michman, ed., Remembering the Holocaust in Germany, 1945-
2000. New York: Peter Lang, pp. 43-57. 

Böhme, Jörn 1991. “Der Golfkrieg, Israel und die bundesdeutsche Friedensbewegung.” In Georg 

Stein, ed., Nachgedanken zum Golfkrieg. Heidelberg: Palmyra, pp. 203-25. 

Boog, Horst 2008. “Die strategische Bomberoffensive der Alliierten gegen Deutschland und die 
Reichsluftverteidigung in der Schlussphase des Krieges.” In: Das Deutsche Reich und der 
Zweite Weltkrieg, ed. Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt, vol. 10.1. Munich: Deutsche 
Verlags-Anstalt, pp. 777-884. 

Brunner, José 2007. “Trauma and Justice: The Moral Grammar of Trauma Discourse from 

Wilhelmine Germany to Post-Apartheid South Africa.” In Austin Sarat, Nadav 
Davidovitch, and Michal Alberstein, eds., Trauma and Memory: Reading, Healing, and 
Making Law. Stanford, CA: Stanford California Press, pp. 97-118. 

Clausewitz, Carl von 1976. On War (1832–34), ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret. 

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Diner, Dan 1991. Der Krieg der Erinnerungen und die Ordnung der Welt. Berlin: Rotbuch. 
Etheridge, Brian 2008. “The Desert Fox, Memory Diplomacy, and the German Question in Early 

Cold War America.” Diplomatic History 32, no. 2: 207-38. 

Evans, Richard J. 2009. The Third Reich at War. New York: Penguin. 
Eyerman, Ron 2002. Cultural Trauma: Slavery and the Formation of African-American Identity. 

Eyerman, Ron 2008. The Assassination of Theo van Gogh: From Social Drama to Cultural 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Trauma. Durham: Duke University Press 

Fox, Thomas C. 2006. “East Germany and the Bombing War.” In Wilfried Wilms and William 

Rasch, eds., Bombs Away! Representing the Air War over Europe and Japan. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp. 113-30. 

Freud, Sigmund 2005. “Three essays on the theory of sexuality.” In The Standard Edition of the 
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, trans. James Strachey, vol. 7. London: 
Hogarth Press, pp. 124-248. 

Friedrich, Jörg 2006. The Fire: The Bombing of Germany, 1940-1945, trans. Allison Brown. 

New York: Columbia University Press. 

Gregor, Neil 2000. “A Schicksalsgemeinschaft? Allied Bombing, Civilian Morale, and Social 

Dissolution in Nuremberg, 1942-1945.” The Historical Journal 43, no. 4: 1051-70.  

Heins, Volker 2007. “Crusaders and snobs: moralizing foreign policy in Britain and Germany, 

1999-2005.” In David Chandler and Volker Heins, eds., Rethinking Ethical Foreign 
Policy: Pitfalls, Possibilities and Paradoxes. London: Routledge, pp. 50-69. 

Heukenkamp, Ursula 2001. “Gestörte Erinnerung. Erzählungen vom Luftkrieg.“ Amsterdamer 

Beiträge zur neueren Germanistik 50.2: 469-92. 

Huyssen, Andreas 2003. “Air War Legacies: From Dresden to Baghdad.” New German Critique, 

no. 90: 163-76 

Kil, Wolfgang 1989. “Dokumente und Argumente.” In Hinterlassenschaft und Neubeginn: 

Fotografien von Dresden, Leipzig und Berlin in den Jahren nach 1945, ed. Wolfgang Kil. 
Leipzig: VEB Fotokinoverlag, pp. 9-28. 

Kloke, Martin 2007. “Israel – Alptraum der deutschen Linken?” In Matthias Brosch et al., eds., 
Exklusive Solidarität: Linker Antisemitismus in Deutschland. Berlin: Metropol, pp. 301-
23. 

 

177

Langenbacher, Eric 2008. “Twenty-first Century Memory Regimes in Germany and Poland: An 
Analysis of Elite Discourses and Public Opinion.” German Politics & Society 26, no. 4: 
50-81. 

Langenohl, Andreas 2001. “Erinnerungskonflikte und Chancen ihrer ‘Hegung’.“ Soziale Welt 52, 

no. 1: 71-91. 

Müller, Rolf-Dieter 2004. Der Bombenkrieg 1939-1945. Berlin: Ch. Links. 
Neumann, Franz 1942. Behemoth: The Structure and Practice of National Socialism 1933-1944. 

New York: Oxford University Press. 

Nolte, Hans-Heinrich 2008. “Die andere Seite des Holocaust.” Die Zeit (Hamburg), January 24. 
Nossack, Hans Erich 2004. The End: Hamburg 1943, trans. Joel Agee. Chicago: Chicago 

University Press. 

Richter, Horst-Eberhard 1991. “Gegen das Vergessen und Verdrängen.“ In Georg Stein, ed., 

Nachgedanken zum Golfkrieg. Heidelberg: Palmyra, pp. 15-21. 

Schäfer, Gert 1992. “Wider die schrecklichen Vereinfacher.” In Jürgen Seifert et al., eds., Logik 

der Destruktion: Der zweite Golfkrieg als erster elektronischer Krieg und die 
Möglichkeiten seiner Verarbeitung im Bewußtsein. Frankfurt: Materialis, pp. 8-14. 
Sebald, W.G. 2004. On the Natural History of Destruction, trans. Anthea Bell. New York: 

Modern Library. 

Shandley, Robert 2001. Rubble Films: German Cinema in the Shadow of the Third Reich. 

Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 

Taylor, Frederick 2004. Dresden, Tuesday, February 13, 1945. London: Bloomsbury. 
Thiessen, Malte 2007. Eingebrannt ins Gedächtnis: Hamburgs Gedenken an Luftkrieg und 

Kriegsende 1943 bis 2005. Munich: Dölling und Galitz. 

White, Joseph Robert 2002. “Target Auschwitz: Historical and Hypothetical German Responses 

to Allied Attack.” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 16, no.1: 54-76. 

Widera, Thomas 2005. “Gefangene Erinnerung. Die politische Instrumentalisierung der 
Bombardierung Dresdens.“ In Lothar Fritze and Thomas Widera, eds., Alliierter 
Bombenkrieg: Das Beispiel Dresden. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, pp. 109-34. 

 
 
 
 
 

 

178

 
Wolf Vostell, “Lipstick Bomber” (1968). 
 
 

 

 
“The Bombing Holocaust Cannot Be Refuted!” Dresden 2004 
 
 

 

 

179

 
“Dresden – Hiroshima – Baghdad. Outlaw the Anglo-American Bombing Terror!” 
Dresden 2008 
 

 

 
“All Good Things Come From Above.” Dresden 2005 
 
 

 

 

180

 

 
“Bomber Harris Superstar—Thanks to You from the Red Antifa.” Berlin 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

181

Traumatic Memory in Generational Perspective  

 

Radim Marada 

Faculty of Social Studies 

Masaryk University 

 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The article attempts to contribute to the recent debate on cultural trauma by 1) adding the 
historically recent example of post-communist memorizing of communism to the cases of the 
Holocaust, the American slavery and the German Nazism, around which the debate has 
particularly evolved, and 2) focusing systematically on the generational aspect of the issue. It 
defends the analytical value of the concept of cultural trauma, both theoretically (in the first part 
of the article) and with the help of the empirical example of memory of communism in 
Czechoslovakia and the Czech Republic (in the second part of the article). It shows how 
memories and past experience acquire a traumatic nature within the context of a generationally 
divided discourse of guilt. It especially accentuates two related features of traumatic 
memory/experience: ambivalence and silencing effect. And it illustrates these two aspects of 
trauma on the example of postcommunist memorizing of the communist experience. It also 
attempts to trace sociologically, rather than psychologically, the relevant intervening variables 
that limit the scope of historical imagination, hindering transferability of the past experience onto 
the younger generations – and thus contributing to the traumatic character of the contested 
memories and the heightened sense of generational divide at the same time. 
 
 
Keywords: collective memory, communication of experience, communist past, cultural 
trauma, generations, post-communism  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Draft – not edited 

 
 
 
 
Introduction 

 

182

