 
Ever since Manheim’s seminal study on generations, sociologists have generally agreed that, for 
an individual, the core of a generational habitus takes shape in the time of entering adulthood. It 
is the moment in one’s life-course when a period of personal maturation intersects with 
formative historical events or forces – the moment at which a youth makes „fresh contact“158 
with history and the adult world. Such a statement indeed calls for a wide range of qualifications. 
Some of them are dealt with by Mannheim, such as why it is in the state of youth that people 
absorb the kind of experience that will be constitutive of their specific generational identity. 
Others remain outside his attention. Among the latter, there is the question of the nature of the 
formative historical events and forces. Why do just some events or periods in history play the 
generation-constitutive role, while others do not? What exactly does their formative function 
consist of? In these points, Mannheim remains largely silent. He takes for granted an 
independent rhythm of history, which sometimes gets more dynamic, sometimes more static, 
fostering the formation of generational awareness in the former case, while hindering it in the 
latter.  
 
In the following, I will take the analytical advantage of the culturalist stream in current sociology 
in order to shed more light on this issue – in a particular context of a recent theoretical debate 
and with a particular empirical aim. It is the triple task of this chapter, first, to contribute to the 
general sociological theory of generations, second, to highlight the generational perspective in 
the sociological debate on cultural trauma and collective memory, and third, to present 
communism as one of the past historical events or rather periods which have left an intense 
generational chasm in its wake.  
 
The sequence of the aims should perhaps be reversed, since the major contribution is attempted 
at the empirical level of getting the topic of communism – more concretely the post-communist 
articulation of generational cleavages in the process of collective, and traumatic remembering of 
communism – on the sociological table. It is less my ambition to correct anything substantial in 
the theory of cultural trauma as it has recently been developed especially by and around the Yale 
                                                 
158 Karl Mannheim, „The Problem of Generations“ in Essays on the Sociology of Knowledge 
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964), 293. 

 

183

Center for Cultural Sociology.159 Rather, I am making an extensive use of it, further 
strengthening the culturalist stance, and highlighting – both empirically and theoretically – the 
generational aspect involved in the debate, especially in the contributions by Bernhard Giesen 
and Ron Eyerman.160 Neither is it my primary task to exercise a critique of Mannheim’s theory 
of generations. A culturalist departure from his position, in accounting history as a producer of 
generational divisions, will be apparent throughout the text. After all, there is not much more to 
add here to Mannheim’s conception on a general level. Even from the viewpoint of recent 
cultural sociology, though not only from this one, Mannheim’s piece on generations remains 
remarkably inspirational, analytically rich, and theoretically sound. As such, it still calls for 
being amended, corrected, and developed via empirical investigations of the subject matter, 
rather than replaced by another theoretical paradigm. 
 
 
From psychoanalytical to cultural concept of trauma (via the generational perspective) 
 
One important amendment to Mannheim’s theory of generations is provided by Bernhard 
Giesen161, and it pursues the path taken in this text as well. It employs the concept of traumatic 
experience as a historical trigger of generational consciousness. Referring to the concept of 
historical time by Reinhart Koselleck, Giesen explores the way in which traumatic events leave a 
strong imprint in the shared experience of a young age cohort, providing a dramatic experiential 
ground for its definition as a distinct generation. “Thus the collective trauma of a generation 
                                                 
159 Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2004). 
160 Bernhard Giesen, „Noncontemporaneity, Asynchronicity and Divided Memories“ in Time & 
Society 13:1 2004a, 27-40. Bernhard Giesen, “The Trauma of Perpetrators: The Holocaust as the 
Traumatic Reference of German national Identity” in Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity. 
Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004). Ron Eyerman, 
“Intellectuals and the Construction of an African American Identity: Outline of a Generational 
Approach” in Generational Consciousness, Narrative, and Politics. June Edmunds and Bryan S 
Turner, eds., (Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002). Ron Eyerman, “Cultural Trauma: 
Slavery and the Formation of African American Identity” in Cultural Trauma and Collective 
Identity. Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004). Ron 
Eyerman, “The Past in the Present: Culture and the Transmission of Memory“ in Acta 
Sociologica 47:2 2004, 159-169. 
161 Bernhard Giesen, „Noncontemporaneity, Asynchronicity and Divided Memories“ 

 

184

constitutes a distinctive historical horizon (…), a founding event of history that for the life span 
of this generation is shared neither by the preceding nor the succeeding generation.”162 Here 
there is one important aspect of a life of a generation. A generation is recognized by social actors 
– among other properties – as a carrier of a specific historical memory, and that specificity stems 
from the unique intensity of a cohort’s encounter with history at the time of youth. Wars won and 
lost, occupations and liberations, cultural upheavals, economic crises or booms, revolutions and 
contra-revolutions, assassinations or emergences of charismatic leaders, any such historical 
turning point is jointly experienced by all concerned, regardless of age. Yet it is always just a 
circumscribed age cohort that encounters a particular historical experience of this kind in their 
formative years of entering (mentally at least) the adult world. This uniquely intense historical 
experience constitutes a distinctive generational bond, the basis of a mutual understanding that 
cannot be easily shared by those who have not gone through the same traumatic ordeal (or 
triumphant glory) at the time of making a “fresh contact” with both history and adult life at the 
same time. 
 
The shared dramatic life-historical experience, however, does not only constitute an abstract 
sense, however strong, of an inalienable generational bond. It also becomes reflected, 
contextualized and sometimes rationalized by representatives of the generation it has brought to 
social and cultural existence, especially in their making sense of an experience of other 
generations. This is what Mannheim takes into account when he speaks of the “interpretive 
formative principles” of a generation.163 A formative generational experience tends to wield a 
perspective for interpreting history in a wider scope. It provides a ground for understanding past 
historical events and experiences of earlier generations, but it also absorbs later impulses, and it 
makes a distinct sense of both within its own sensibility. Therefore a collective past, shared 
across all age cohorts, tends to present itself from different angles to different generations of one 
and the same collectivity. It is when such differences become articulate and clash with each other 
in conflicting interpretations that age cohorts become generations, that is, they are recognized as 
such by involved social actors and thus made socially real and mattering. 
 
                                                 
162 ibid., 36. 
163 Mannheim, op.cit., 306. 

 

185

To account for such cases, the concept of cultural trauma comes particularly apposite, although it 
should not be hastily applied to all instances of generational conflict over history. It departs from 
the psychoanalytically restricted understanding of traumatic experience, but for good analytical 
reason. Psychoanalysis stresses deep inhibitions in one’s psyche to recall disturbing past 
experiences, that is, something in one’s past which is difficult to digest morally and existentially. 
Trauma or traumatic situation, in this perspective, is located in one’s past, and the mechanisms of 
repressing it from memory are largely unconscious. Yet once the traumatizing experience is 
identified in one’s past, for example by a psychoanalyst, the traumatic effect does not 
automatically disappear by this virtue. To the contrary, the disturbing past experience is just 
made subject to reflection and self-reflection.   
 
The concept of cultural trauma takes the step, and it understands the painful process of reflexive 
memorizing as a constitutive part of the traumatic experience. Should a discomforting past 
experience become traumatic, it still must remain in the memory reservoir of the concerned 
actors. They may strive to forget it, repress it in their self-understanding, disregard it while 
solving practical problems of today, and make it meaningless. At the end of the day, however, 
one can always be reminded of it, accidentally or intentionally, either as an individual, or by a 
challenge to an entire collectivity to which s/he belongs. If such a remainder brings about the 
feelings of discomfort, insecurity, anxiety, a doubt about one’s Self, the experience in its 
traumatic effect has never been completely forgotten or repressed. It still surfaces as a distinct 
moment of reference in one’s biography, as it does in common history.  
 
In other words, an event or an experience is not traumatic in itself. It is the uneasy memory of it 
that makes it traumatic. An event and its experience assume the meaning of trauma in so far as 
recalling them shatters one’s personal or collective self-understanding.  
“Trauma is not the result of a group experiencing pain. It is the result of this acute discomfort 
entering into the core of the collectivity’s sense of its own identity.”164 After all, Sigmund Freud 
himself comes close to the point when he says, e.g.: “It is as if these patients had not finished 
                                                 
164 Jeffrey C. Alexander, “Toward a Theory of Cultural Trauma” in Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity. Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004), 
10. 

 

186

with the traumatic situation, as though they were still faced by it as an immediate task which has 
not been dealt with; (…).”165 But the psychoanalytical position switches the cause and the 
symptom. It still locates trauma in the past, and stretches its impact mysteriously to the present. 
The cultural sociological approach, to the contrary, shows that traumatic are the barriers – 
cultural and social, communicative and psychological – that actors face when trying to make 
sense of their past experience, to get the latter in line with how they want to see themselves 
today. Then repression of a past deeply disturbing experience is not only a psychological 
phenomenon, it also stems from limited communicability of such experience. It is the 
impossibility to square such experience with our present self-understanding and self-esteem that 
makes it truly traumatic. 
 
The cultural sociological approach does not completely disregard and devaluate the 
psychoanalytical inspiration. It just re-formulates one of its central concepts in order to endow it 
with a wider empirical reach and a richer explanatory power, at least from the sociological point 
of view. In fact, the cultural approach employs the concept of trauma for the same analytical 
reason as psychoanalysis did – that is, in order to account for an aspect in our experience that 
otherwise may have gone unnoticed. This is the ultimate reason for replanting the concept of 
trauma from the psychoanalytical soil into the cultural sociological one.  
 
We adopt the concept of cultural trauma precisely because it makes it possible to relate past 
experience and its present memorizing to the empirical process of articulation of generational 
cleavages. It makes it possible to account empirically for the case of ‘divided memories’166 as 
one, though not the sole, aspect of articulation of generational distinctions. And the generational 
analytical perspective, in turn, makes empirical sense of the generational transferability of 
trauma through communicative non-transferability of the traumatizing experience onto those 
who have not lived through that experience. Just as individual trauma comes with a 
biographically shattered self-esteem and self-understanding, collective trauma relates to the 
historically wounded identity of a collectivity. Trauma comes with a transposition of a present 
                                                 
165 Sigmund Freud, “Fixation to Traumas – The Unconscious” in Introductory Lectures on 
Psychoanalysis (New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Co., 1966), 340. 
166 Giesen, „Noncontemporaneity, Asynchronicity and Divided Memories“ 

 

187

conflict onto the chronological dimension. It is a powerful reminder that integrity and identity 
finds its sources in the body’s past. And the nature of generational conflicts makes it clear that 
this applies as well to collective bodies, that is, to collectively shared identity and integrity. 
 
For generations are not only historically emerging and disappearing collectivities. They also are 
relational phenomena. As there would be no generation without a shared historical lot of a 
specific age cohort, there also would be no generation without other generations sharing the 
same collective identity (national, ethnic, religious, regional, etc.). One’s own generational 
feeling is only acknowledged in encounters, physical or ideational, with what is identified as 
representations or representatives of a different generation inhabiting the same historical region. 
It is not just a particular historical experience that makes a generation out of an age cohort. It is 
this experience being absorbed, understood, and represented differently than how representatives 
of other generations understand and represent this same collective experience. Generational 
conflict – and generations alone, for that matter – can only emerge if individuals identify with 
others not only along the same-age line, but also with those who are generationally different, 
with their predecessors, and their ancestors. Generations make experiential sense only within a 
collective body with a shared history, but divided memory of it. It is only then that a difference 
in memorizing the past matters in the present. An articulated generational cleavage or conflict, in 
turn, reminds us of a shared (historical) identity of all involved. The life of generations is an 
experience of the non-contemporaneity of the contemporaneous.167 
 
 
Uneasy memories of communism  
 
The making of history that matters 
 
Although the concept of cultural trauma has mainly been discussed and developed in reference to 
the Holocaust, slavery and Nazism168, the East-Central European communism seems to be an 
equally inviting historical case to be accounted for in this analytical perspective. And this is the 
                                                 
167 Mannheim, op.cit., 283. 
168 Alexander, Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity 

 

188

case despite the latter poses some specific difficulties for such analysis at the same time. The 
reason for both, analytical usefulness of the concept of cultural trauma and analytical difficulties 
of using the concept, is basically the same: communism is, compared to the other cases, a more 
recent historical “event” – but one which has already been subject to conflicting public 
interpretations and discoursive struggles in the post-communist countries. It is the vivid and 
publicly contested memory of the communist past, shattering common national identities and 
peculiarly dividing national communities in the post-communist countries, which signifies 
presence of the trauma process. It is therefore somehow surprising that the question of 
communist trauma has so far largely remained outside of sociologists’ attention.169 
 
The lack of attention to the trauma aspect in collective memorizing of the communist past relates 
to a certain uniqueness of this case as compared to the other historical examples of the trauma 
process. Firstly, the Czechoslovak “Lustration Law”,170 contemplated in public and political 
forums since the very regime change and implemented in 1991, was of a different kind than the 
post-war Nuremberg Trials in Germany, in two respects at least. It was not imposed by a foreign 
power, and (as such) it is a powerful symbol of an internal division within the national 
community between victims and culprits of the communist injustices. While in the cases of 
Nazism and the Holocaust the whole collectivities, Germans or Jews, have naturally been seen as 
                                                 
169 Piotr Sztompka has come relatively close to this topic in his article “The Trauma of Social 
Change: A case of Postcommunist Societies”. (Piotr Sztompka, “The Trauma of Social Change: 
A Case of Postcommunist Societies” in Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity. Jeffrey C. 
Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004)) But, as the subtitle says, his 
primary concern is with postcommunism. In such a case, however, serious problems arise with 
the analytical use and explanatory power of the concept of trauma. Hans Joas rightly points out 
that “as a whole his chapter is characterized by an extremely wide notion of trauma so that 
almost every social change would have to be seen as traumatic.” (Hans Joas, “Cultural Trauma? 
On the Most Recent Turn in Jeffrey Alexander’s Cultural Sociology” in: European Journal of 
Social Theory. 8:3 2005, 372) Moreover, in Sztompka’s use of the concept, the question of 
traumatic memory, the difficult recalling of a traumatic experience – which is central to the 
cultural (and also psychoanalytical) understanding of trauma – disappears altogether. 
170 The “Lustration Law” was implemented in order to legally prevent former high positioned 
functionaries of the Communist Party, contracted collaborators of the communist secret police, 
and members of the communist “People’s Militia” to hold higher offices in the post-communist 
state bureaucracy and other institutions (like, e.g., state sponsored or non-private universities and 
media). In the following part of the article, I will be exclusively focusing on the Czech and 

 

189

perpetrators or victims respectively, this does not apply to the post-communist national 
communities. Secondly, the level, nature and acts of historical guilt have been vibrantly present 
issues within post-communist societies from the very moment of regime changes, and they have 
constituted sharp symbolic divisions with concrete consequences for the involved actors. Not 
only did the question of historical guilt come from inside, it also came immediately after the 
historical break – and formation of generational divisions, as we will see shortly, has ever since 
been an important part of this historical self-reflection.171 And thirdly, while the process of 
cultural constitution a trauma of slavery among American Blacks was a rather gradual process, 
triggered by later developments like the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s, the 
intensified interest in ethnic (African) roots of black Americans, and the establishment of widely 
recognized public representations of American Blacks (black literature, black history accounts, 
intellectuals and writers, political representatives, etc.)172, all of this – political and social 
mobilization, strong sense of national identity, and public representations – has been at work 
since the actual collapse of communist regimes. 
 
It therefore seems that we cannot refer to a certain delay in the trauma effect of the collective 
memory of communism, a delay that has been noted in the other three instances (even though in 
each for different reasons, partly suggested above), and which is another constitutive part of the 
trauma process. Still silence has been a part of this process as the latter developed in the post-
communist environment. It has been the silence of those who have been persistently and 
impassionedly asked for explanation of the nature and motives of their assumed collaboration 
with the communist regime. Their personal testament should provide an answer to how it had 
been possible at all that majority of the adult population so willingly exchanged trivial or just 
                                                                                                                                                             
Czechoslovak case. But much of the argument, on the general level, can easily be applied to 
other post-communist countries and contexts as well.  
171 In the post-war Germany, according to Giesen’s account, the public salience of the question 
of historical guilt as well as the strong sense of a generational difference constituted around this 
question did not appear before “the 1960s, when a new generation entered the political stage. 
This generation was born after the war and did not have personal memories of the Nazi past. 
Children of this generation broke the coalition of silence and faced their parents with 
inconvenient questions that until then had been the mark of outsiders (…).” (Giesen, “The 
Trauma of Perpetrators: The Holocaust as the Traumatic Reference of German national Identity”, 
127) 
172 See Eyerman 2002, 2004a, 2004b 

 

190

fallacious certainties for significant concessions, and thus made the long continuation of the 
unjust regime possible. What has been sought is a remedy for the wounded national identity, a 
clue to a national understanding and self-understanding. The silence of the communist trauma is 
the unwillingness of the assumed culprits to explain what in the eyes of many of them is 
inexplicable, since their language does not fit the newly created framework of historical 
imagination. The criteria of sincerity have changed with the historical turn. The addressed feel 
that the query for an explanation is in fact a demand for their apology, a demand that is 
psychologically uncomfortable, since such “coming out” can never lead to a full understanding 
and reconciliation. The stakes are too high, and the discoursive means at hand severely restricted. 
 
It is an important feature of post-communist environment – and this particularly applies to the 
Czechoslovak and Czech case – that it has provided a largely uncontested agent of critical 
historical self-reflection: the youth. Young people (especially university students, young 
professionals, but to some extent also high school students) took an important part in triggering 
the processes that eventually led to the old regime’s collapse. True, the picture of the youth’s 
revolutionary involvement soon reached an almost mythical dimension in the post-revolutionary 
culture. Yet all the more it has endowed the youth with a strong legitimization to ask the 
uncomfortable questions. It elevated them to the symbolic status of those who: first, could not 
have been straightforwardly responsible for the past injustices; second, have therefore been the 
most sincere in their revolutionary involvement; and third, whose lives has already been and still 
will be affected by the troubled past nevertheless. This symbolic position dissociated them from 
majority of the adult part of the population, and it did so prospectively and retrospectively as 
well. They are presented and self-presented as those with a unique historical merit and 
imagination, as wittingly captured in Adam Michnik’s famous quip: the young people made the 
revolution happen, since they did not know it was impossible.  
 
It is also the historical immediacy of the trauma discourse which has made the emerging 
generational cleavage a more salient aspect of the historical self-reflection in post-communist 
societies. It is the urgent public and political concern with the relatively recent past that 
represents one of the most dramatic discoursive fields through which the generational cleavage 
has been articulated.  

 

191

 
The immediate and continuing political sensitivity and public salience of the question of the 
communist past in post-communist societies brings about two sorts of problems for a 
sociological analysis. Let me briefly address them both. On the one hand, any attempt at a 
sociological account of the current trauma process runs the risk of becoming part of the process 
itself, instead of reclaiming the status of an ideologically disinterested (if not impartial) analysis 
designed to provide a deeper understanding of the stakes involved. It can easily be read through 
the partisan lenses of “which side are you on”. This may not be a problem for a more radical sort 
of ‘public sociology’, yet it is a problem for any truly critical theory. For the latter’s task is not to 
provide an intellectual ammunition to a party in ideological or political conflict, but to cultivate a 
critical understanding and self-understanding of the involved actors. 
 
The other side of the problem is analytical in kind, and it takes us back to the subject matter. As 
students of generations well know, their topic is largely elusive when the task is to analyze 
generations that are still in the making. It is a comfortable theoretical enterprise to account for 
the generation of the 1960s, for example, since this generation has already secured its symbolic 
status in western history, it has established itself through a distinct identity and various cultural 
representations. We have already been able to observe how representatives of this generation and 
its identity have later left a distinctive impact on culture, politics, family patterns, and also work 
ethic. And knowing the outcomes, it also is easier for us to trace back the relevant aspects of the 
formative experience of this generation.  
 
None of this is readily on hand when we look at the post-communist age cohort, the post-
communist youth. And yet we still can see how intensely young people in post-communist 
countries are haunted by the past of their parents, teachers, bosses, older politicians and 
journalists, neighbors and colleagues at work. Certainly this is not their only or primary concern. 
It only comes to mind in certain situations and contexts. But it has already found its place in their 
historical sensitivity, even though it is troubling for some more than others, and it has been 
articulated in specific forums (the media, universities, social movements, judiciary, institutions 
of political representation, etc.), to which not all of them have equal access.  
 

 

192

The personal past of their older mates matters to young people, too, since it seems to affect their 
current lives and their future as well. The strong sense of a historical break, which makes the past 
of parents and grandparents seem so unique and their past world so different from that of today, 
is the basic experiential ground for an equally strong feeling of generational difference. At this 
point, it even does not need an explicit or articulate content. It is irresistibly suspected and taken 
for granted. Substantial articulation of the generational difference, after all, will be almost 
naturally delivered by the urgent examination and re-examination of the mysterious past, i.e., in a 
process instantaneously triggered by the sense of a dramatic historical break.  
 
The question of the elders’ past can only be seen as a generational problem because this past 
becomes a part of common history, that is, a history that bounds the younger and the older 
together. It is not easy to ignore history’s challenge in an environment which persistently brings 
the communist past up as a problem for mundane social and political processes, not only for the 
shared national identity. The interest in the past is unswervingly imposed by the sense of the 
latter’s practical importance. Here history offers itself as a source of understanding of those 
affected by it, as a ground for explaining their present behavior, making sense of their present 
motives, and inferring what may be expected from them. And all this is easier achieved to the 
extent to which the past gets anchored in a frictionless framework of collective memory, while 
the will to a critical ‘historical understanding’ has weakened.173 Historical understanding, with 
its ambiguities and uncertainties, always seems less practical in providing a clear point 
orientation in the present and for the future. And an appeal to such ‘historical understanding’ of 
past experience in its ambiguity will readily be recognized as a cunning trick, as an attempt to 
                                                 
173 Here I use the distinction made by Peter Novick with reference to Maurice Halbwachs: 
“Indeed, collective memory is in crucial senses ahistorical. To understand something historically 
is to be aware of its complexity, to have sufficient detachment to see it from multiple 
perspectives, to accept the ambiguities, including moral ambiguities, of protagonists’ motives 
and behavior. Collective memory simplifies; sees events from a single, committed perspective; is 
impatient with ambiguities of any kind; reduces events to mythic archetypes.” (Peter Novick, 
The Holocaust in American Life (Boston: A Mariner Book, 2000), 3-4) This way of contrasting 
‘collective memory’ with ‘historical understanding’, strongly evokes a positivist preference for 
the latter as the rational, indeed scientific attitude to the past. It will be clear form my further text 
that I see it analytically more useful and empirically proper to read this distinction as one 
between two ideal-typical strategies of dealing with the past in concrete struggles among 
concerned parties over the interpretation of a shared past. 

of 

 

193

obscure the past and blur the clear line between good and evil, as just another way of retouching 
the historical and personal guilt. The promise of an easier orientation in the contemporary world 
incites morally categorical questions, which are as discomforting for the human products of 
communism as were those confronting members of the German war generation some decades 
ago.174 
 
 
Posing the question of guilt 
 
The trauma of the communist past finds it public expressions and hovers in the collective 
memorizing process as a trauma of perpetrators, not as a trauma of victims (as is the case of the 
Holocaust and slavery in Jewish and black American historical memory). In this general sense, 
the post-communist ordeal of collective remembrance resembles the trauma process in the post-
Nazi Germany, described by Giesen175. Being labeled as a perpetrator, as one who took part in 
the atrocities or injustices of the past regime and therefore is held responsible for current 
problems and contamination of national identity, itself is a stigmatizing position. But the core of 
the trauma process resides in the limited communicability of the perpetrators’ past experience. It 
is the actual impossibility to rationalize the past experience which only converts stigma into 
trauma. In their self-defense, the accused have often inclined to present themselves as victims of 
the unfavorable historical circumstances – which is the case of (post-)communists as it was the 
case of the members of the German war generation.176 The kind of ‘historical understanding’ 
which muddles up victims and perpetrators, however, is not easily acceptable, especially from 
the moral point of view, and particularly by those who did not live in the troubled past.177 
                                                 
174 See note no. 6. 
175 Giesen, “The Trauma of Perpetrators: The Holocaust as the Traumatic Reference of German 
national Identity”. 
176 ibid. 
177 The status of outsiders vis-à-vis the communist society has not only pertained to the post-
communist youth, but also, e.g., to Czech or Czechoslovak emigrants, to clear dissidents or those 
who had been in a sense exempt from facing the moral-political dilemmas of life in communism 
(like some segments of the working class, which still had nothing to lose but their chains, even 
during the communist times). Again, not all of the representatives of these categories have been 
equally eager in posing the question of historical guilt – but they have certainly been better 
psychologically predisposed to do so. 

 

194

 
Moreover, even if the analogy between communism and Nazism would seem inadequate in terms 
of historical understanding, it has nevertheless become a part of the struggle over interpretation 
of responsibility for communist injustices. ‘Look, we were no Nazis’, goes one of the self-
defensive patterns of easing the past compromises with the communist regime. Yet also this 
statement is readily recognized as an instrumental strategy of avoiding personal responsibility, 
rather than being taken as a satisfactory historical explanation, and much less as an apology. It is 
little convincing because it looks utterly inappropriate. It only confirms the traumatizing nature 
of a remembering which is marked by helplessness in rationalizing one’s past behavior, and 
eventually by unwillingness to even try to do so. The point is that the concrete extent and 
character of the past atrocities plays just a little role in the cultural production of trauma. Trauma 
is constituted retrospectively, and what matters is the dramatization of challenges which history 
brings to the present. 
 
The question of guilt has been central to the reflection of the communist past, in three respects. 
Firstly, there has been the question of who was guilty for the widespread injustice of the 
communist regime, from imprisoning people for publicly stating their political views opposing 
the policies of the Communist Party and the regime in general, to withholding passports or 
making it impossible to pursue a career for which one was qualified or to study at a university or 
even a high school (for reasons like having a family member emigrated to the West). Who was 
responsible for creating the atmosphere of fear, docility, and opportunism for a large part of the 
population? Secondly, there has been the more immediate concern with people’s past, when new 
elites and leaders were looked for after the regime change, not only in politics, but also in the 
media, at schools and universities, in the state bureaucracy and other institutions. How is 
someone reliable to be found when those who were qualified for these positions had often been 
part of the old communist “nomenclature” or too close to it? How are true proponents of the old 
regime to be recognized in contrast to those who just played the game and did not harm anyone 
directly, at least? And thirdly, the question of guilt arises as many problems of the democratic 
transition are attributed to the communist heritage. Who is to be held accountable for the current 
problems in political life, the economy, and social relations – problems which could have been 
avoided if only we had not started with the burdens the corrupt communist regime? 

 

195

 
 
Disclosing a generational gap: the revolutionary generation vs. the normalization generation 
 
Young people have not been exempt from facing these dilemmas. They have been involved in all 
of the three versions of the post-communist discourse of guilt, although perhaps most 
immediately in the second one. This especially concerns the age cohort that, at a young age, took 
part in the regime changes at the turn of the 1980s and 1990s. As noted above, in Czechoslovakia 
students and young people in general played a crucial role in what has become known as the 
Velvet Revolution of 1989. Violent suppression of a student demonstration in Prague, on 17 
November that year, unleashed a series of events and activities, which eventually led to the 
regime change. Students and young people were particularly active in the first weeks and months 
of the changes – at universities or in the work place.  
 
It was these events and the implicated conflicts what started to draw the dividing line between 
what has later been labeled as the revolutionary and normalization generations. The former took 
its label from spectacular involvement of many of its representatives in the process of the regime 
change. The latter received its brand name from the Communist Party vocabulary of the 1970s. 
Then the official term ‘normalization’ served as a legitimization of the massive crackdown of 
Czechoslovak authorities (especially the Communist Party, judiciary, and police) on any sign of 
ideological dissent, in a widespread and perpetual campaign that followed the military and 
political termination of the democratizing reform process known as Prague Spring of 1968. By 
and large, the term ‘normalization’ had soon become a symbol of the repressive policy of the 
Communist Party under the renewed Soviet control. Long before the regime change in 1989, it 
had been widely (but always privately or just implicitly) understood as an ideological nickname 
for creating the atmosphere of fear, distrust, intrigues, opportunism, docility, and 
submissiveness. Apparently, with such a history of the term and its meaning, the label itself 
imposes a great deal of stigmatization on those who happen to get generationally identified with 
and by it. 
 

 

196

However, it should be noted that this culturally defined and discursively reproduced generational 
division has effectively run through the young cohort itself. That is, it has also divided those who 
were in their twenties and sometimes even late teens at the time of the regime change. The 
cultural definition of the generational divide exerted its social power from the very start. What 
was at stake among the young people themselves, too, was the level and nature of their 
involvement or non-involvement in concrete processes of the regime change at universities or in 
work places, their short institutional past (especially in the Socialist Union of Youth, but 
sometimes also already in the Communist Party), their reputations among peers. All this sorted 
people within this age cohort itself, making ‘revolutionaries’ of some and ‘normalizers’ of 
others, regardless of age. True, in concrete individual cases, this seldom happened definitively, 
once and for all, in every respect. Such clear-cut divisions are rare in history, and they are even 
rarer at times of an inflamed generational partition. Formative generational classification 
struggles initially often occur under the disguise of other sorts of social and political struggles, 
and almost always in persistent negotiations and endeavor to join the side one wants to represent 
and seeks to belong to. In these struggles, generational divisions find their dramatic articulation, 
so that they can serve as a cultural label of belonging to the people of today (or the future) or to 
the people of yesterday. It gradually becomes a commonly understood scheme of interpretation 
and as such it is at hand to be employed in concrete social interactions. The actual generational 
categorization of actors and their generational self-identification comes to word situationally, 
that is, in proper moments and in relevant contexts. However episodically such (self-
)categorization may occur, it often works with a powerful social effectiveness, in so far it is tied 
with positive or negative social sanctions, expectations and self-esteem. 
 
Of course, the cultural definition of the generational gap has not been completely arbitrary in 
historical terms. The ultimate generational division between ‘revolutionaries’ and ‘normalizers’ 
has also reflected the shift in formative historical experience of both age cohorts. The 
representatives of the young revolutionary generation were about to enter the world of adults in 
the second half of the 1980s. This was a world whose effective working principles they saw in 
moral corruption, hypocrisy, and cynical submission to the communist regime. By itself, 
however, this would not have been a different experience than that of the normalization 
generation of the 1970s. Then, in the aftermath of the Warsaw Pact occupation of the country in 

 

197

1968, the installment of the pro-Soviet puppet regime and the political purges that followed 
(especially in the work place and also in the Communist Party itself), another historical round of 
the morally corrupting struggle for positions took place. This was the experience which largely 
shaped the world of the normalization generation, including the nature of its basic inner practical 
and moral conflicts running along the axis “cowardly collaboration vs. heroic resistance”. These 
were the extreme points which in many social contexts and relations (at work and in schools, in 
wider families, among friends, in church and other associations, etc.) provided working criteria 
for a moral categorization and self-understanding of social actors.  
 
The problem for the young in the late 1980s was that now, while cynicism, hypocrisy and 
submissiveness were still expected as a norm of adult behavior, they no longer at least 
safeguarded a chance for a relatively good career. It seemed that good positions had already been 
taken and the circulation of cadres principally reserved for an already re-consolidated, narrow 
and enclosed nomenclature elite. Even young members of this elite started to perceive that they 
can hardly convert their privileged family background into the capital they sought, that is, 
especially the economic one.178 The experience of growing up in the late 1980s was thus a 
variation of the proletarian socialization: amoral submissive assiduousness no longer promised 
noteworthy gains, and civic indifference did no longer resulted in serious losses. Compared to 
the young people of the late 1960s and early 1970s, the young of the late 1980s had less to gain 
by being obedient, and less to lose by being disobedient.  
 
Also this brought many active young people into the revolutionary project and post-revolutionary 
politics at all levels.179 And one of the tasks they embraced was how to get rid of the corrupt 
proponents of the old regime. Of course, not all of them were active in this direction, not all of 
them to the same degree and in the same style, and young people were not the only ones 
involved. Older people took part in the various ‘councils’ and campaigns as well. Yet while the 
                                                 
178 Ivo Možný, Ivo, Proč tak snadno. Některé rodinné důvody sametové revoluce (Why So 
Smoothly. Some family reasons for the velvet revolution) (Praha: SLON, 1991). 
179 We could call these young people active in the so called “civic forums” at universities and 
places of work, but also in the media and newly emerging political parties and movements, a 
generational unit (Mannheim 1964), since they were representative of the whole generation, or 
at least acted like they were.  

 

198

latter tended to stress professional competence, and disregard small concessions to the old 
regime on the part of those who were being profiled, the question of moral purity acquired a 
more prominent place among the young.180 Sure there may have been a pragmatic element at 
work in stressing moral competence by the young people. As they were at times reminded, they 
had not had that much time and opportunities in their lives to get involved in the corrupting 
practices of the old regime, to joint the Communist Party, to sign a petition against the dissidents, 
to accept a position in the political apparatus. Neither had they had the time and opportunities to 
gain sufficient professional reputation and skills required after the regime change.181 And if 
some of them had managed to advance in taking some part in the old regime practices, this 
qualified them to being more easily attached to the generation of the normalizers and normalized.   
 
However, it would be misleading to see the moralizing posture among young revolutionaries 
solely in the perspective of a purely pragmatic calculus of personal gains and losses. What is at 
work here, rather, is the ‘practical sense’ as Pierre Bourdieu182 coins the term. The moral attitude 
mirrors some basic dispositions, schemes of orientation in the social world, which reflect the 
specific experience of historical socialization described above. It is this experience which 
endows the attitude with subjective cogency for the concerned social actors, and which gives 
Bourdieu’s concept its explanatory power. The accent on moral competence of new leaders at all 
levels of different sorts of institutions (not just the political ones) can be understood, in the case 
of the young revolutionaries, as an expression of a mental disposition which no longer took the 
corrupt world of normalization for granted. For them, immunity against the lures of opportunism 
                                                
180 Milan Otáhal and Miroslav Vaněk, Sto studentských revolucí (A Hundred of Student 
Revolutions) (Praha: Lidové noviny, 1999). 
181 In fact, it has become a prominent maker of this generation to complain about the lack of 
competences: weak at foreign languages, no experience abroad, no proper orientation in the 
world of politics and business, no knowledge of newest developments in the fields of their 
interest, etc.  They felt to be deprived of all of this by the regime they dismantled. Ironically, the 
change they had sought made losers of them again – a truly tragic situation. They soon began to 
distinguish themselves generationally from those even younger people who, in their eyes, were 
able to consummate all the new opportunities opened up by the regime change. No wonder the 
young revolutionaries have leaned so much to the value of moral credit. For many, it seems to be 
the only asset remaining to them. (See Radim Marada, „Social Construction of Youth and 
Formation of Generational Awareness after Socialism“ in Petr Mareš et al. Society, 
Reproduction and Contemporary Challenges (Brno: Barrister & Principal, 2004) 
182 Pierre Bourdieu, Practical Reason (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988). 

 

 

199

was still less a matter of personal heroism and still more a matter of common sense – while the 
readiness to give in was not only morally dubious but also less and less intelligible. In the late 
1980s, it was still more difficult to get a reasonable explanation from their peers who were too 
active in expressing their loyalty to the communist regime, especially by joining the Communist 
Party.  
 
 
Imposition of silence 
 
The young people of the late 1980s could perhaps still understand their parents, who entered the 
Party during the 1970s or earlier. But they were sorry for them, rather, since the parents had 
made this concession in order to keep life chances of their children open, without the offspring 
seeing any noteworthy point in such a sacrifice.183 In both instances – in contact with their peers 
and their parents – this resulted in a communicative barrier: irritating, depressing, and 
embarrassing at occasional attempts to break it. As demonstrated also by Alan’s study, 
membership in the Communist Party has been carefully avoided as a conversational topic in 
many families, before as well as after 1989. In the 1970s and the early 1980s, this was still an 
understanding silence. The reasons for political and moral concessions were clear without 
saying, and the shared silence protected those who made them against the feeling and label of 
cowardice or weakness, if not unscrupulousness. No family wants to have such a person in home. 
By the end of the 1980s, the silence started to be driven by futility, rather than understanding. 
 
When the question of guilt and past misdeeds was publicly raised later on, in the time of post-
revolutionary institutional and moral purification, those who had in some way compromised with 
the communist regime did not have any convincing language at hand to explain their moral-
political concessions and retain a sense of self-esteem at the same time. And this especially has 
been a problem for the representatives of the normalization generation. What has remained to 
them, in the context of a public discourse of historical guilt, were arguments pointing to their 
                                                 
183 Josef Alan, Josef, “Rodinné vztahy a členství v KSČ” (“Relations in Families and 
Membership in the Communist Party”) in Otevřená minulost: autobiografická sociologie státního 

 

200

professional ambitions and care for their families – both in danger had they not been loyal to the 
communist regime. But these arguments came little satisfactory to the audience, partly in relation 
to the historical significance of the past misdemeanors (legitimization and in effect support of the 
unjust regime), partly for the futility of such collaboration which after all often did not bring the 
fruits that were to justify it (“look at those who resisted the lures of opportunism, and still 
achieved something and provided for their families”). The outcome has been the picture of 
amoral cowardice combined with historical incompetence. And this is difficult to face by way of 
a rational communication. 
 
There is still another intervening variable that makes it difficult for members of the 
‘normalization generation’ to attempt a public reconstruction of their communist experience. 
Since about the later 1990s, there has been a growing tendency among younger film directors, 
writers, journalists, and sometimes historians and social scientists to account for and come to 
terms with the communist past of their nation.184 From these endeavors, there have emerged two 
representative types of the ‘normalization character’: cynical opportunists on the one hand, and 
devoted communists on the other. The former participate in the regime game only to the point of 
securing their job and family, and perhaps gaining some private profit (like the permission to 
travel abroad), the latter actively foster the regime, although still less by conviction, and still 
more because they know that their privileges depend on it. Without overestimating the impact of 
the culture and media industry, these pictures have certainly contributed to limiting the space of 
imagination in dealing with the communist past, especially for those who do not have direct 
(adult) experience with it. The extent to which these are the only imaginable prototypes of the 
life in communism, biographical stories of the older generation are but variations of the two 
prototypical characters. There is no place in this interpretative framework for those who did not 
belong to nomenclature, nor to the dissent, who made some concessions to the communist 
regime to avoid troubles, but who did feel this as a moral problem, and whose identity was 
                                                                                                                                                             
socialismu (An Open Past: Autobiographical Sociology of State Socialism), Zdeněk Konopásek, 
ed., (Praha: Karolinum, 1999). 
184 It is quite symptomatic, in this respect, that also the director of the German Oscar awarded 
movie The Lives of Others, dealing with the communist past in East Germany before 1989, has 
come as if from another world than he is depicting, in double sense: Florian Henckel von 

 

201

shattered for that reason. There is no place in such a framework for the ambiguous experiences 
and the complexity of pressures of life during communism, in which keeping moral credit in one 
respect sometimes required giving it up in another. The other option during the communist times, 
in the eyes of many, was to resist and become a pointless hero – perhaps admired by some for a 
time, but abandoned by others for good, keeping some moral credit within their families, but 
confronted with a label of practical irresponsibility therein. 
 
The categorical nature of the question of guilt, along with the variety of contexts in which it has 
been posed, has brought about peculiar discursive dynamics. At the abstract level, the dividing 
line between guilt, that is, responsibility for the past injustices, and exemption from such 
responsibility has been clear. However abstract – that is, de-contextualized – this question is, it 
has been posed dramatically and urgently in various public forums. But the criteria of guilt 
(responsibility) have, at the same time, varied according to the context and the stake, and most 
often they have been lumped together and used arbitrarily or instrumentally. What did it mean to 
be a proponent of the old regime?  Was an active and intentional participation in Communist 
Party campaigns against real or potential threats to the regime necessary to qualify one for 
historical guilt? Or did just utterly formal membership in the Union of the Czechoslovak-Soviet 
Friendship, which many chose for their CV’s as a less compromising alternative to joining the 
Communist Party, amount to a support to the regime? What constituted effective collaboration 
with the oppressive communist regime? Did it concern just those in higher positions within the 
Communist Party nomenclature and those found in communist secret police files as its 
collaborators? Or did every member of the Communist Party (about a 1,5 million people from 
the population of 15 million in Czechoslovakia) contribute to past injustices, and thus cannot be 
exempt from their guilt and responsibility? Must every journalist, every teacher, every state 
bureaucrat, every artist appearing on TV, every store manager, etc. – regardless of their 
membership in the Communist Party – have been somehow allied with the regime? Did not all 
99% of the adult population who took part in the staged elections (with results known in 
advance) effectively support the regime?  
 
                                                                                                                                                             
Donnersmarck was born in the western part of Germany (in Cologne) in 1973. He was only 16 
years old when the Berlin Wall came down, and he was 33 when making the movie. 

 

202

Confronted with the lack of clarity in its own criteria, the imperative question of guilt has 
resulted in the kind of ambivalence that is constitutive of cultural trauma.185 It is largely due to 
such ambivalence that the question of historical guilt has become so urgent for some (especially 
the younger), and so discomforting for others (especially the older). “Like psychological 
ambivalence, its manifestation at the sociocultural level sets the stage for the frequently observed 
tendency for generation after generation to engage in compulsive examining and reexamining, 
bringing up new aspects of the trauma, reinterpreting, reevaluating, and battling over symbolic 
significance.”186 Smelser’s account is generally right. But it should be added that the compulsion 
to examine and reexamine the past is not only incited by the very absence of the clear criteria of 
good and evil, by the ambivalence of the past experience when confronted with present 
challenges and attempted self-understandings. The urgency alone stimulates the sense of 
ambivalence which is difficult to overcome communicatively. 
 
On the part of the normalization generation in particular, such ambivalence has brought about a 
silencing effect. For this was the generation which, unlike still older generations, did not have 
any sound excuse for taking part in the corrupt communist project. Members of the older 
generations can at least refer to the attractiveness of the communist idea after experience of the 
1930s’ economic depression and the Second World War. And those who took an active part in 
the reform process of the Prague Spring of 1968 (especially if they were later expelled from the 
Communist Party) can refer to the democratic potential of their vision of ‘socialism with human 
face’.  They can be, and often are (even by themselves), seen and labeled as foolish, historically 
disoriented, but not as morally corrupt. The possibility to refer to these historical circumstances 
of their guilt – if they have accepted it at all – makes them generationally different from those 
who already lack any such historical explanation of their collaboration life strategies. 
 
The memorized history is by no means on the side of the normalization generation, it works 
mercilessly against this generation. However its representatives may try, their explanations are 
perceived as either incomplete or deceiving. Whatever they say in their defense – how they made 
                                                 
185 Neil Smelser, “Psychological Trauma and Cultural Trauma” in Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity. Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004). 
186  ibid., 54 

 

203

fun of the communists in private or avoided participating in May Day parades by making 
themselves ill – this may at most be a folkloric part of their conversations with coevals. But it 
finds little resonance among the young, if meant as an evidence for personal courage and 
dignity. The young lack the right imagination to value such ‘heroism without risk’, they have 
already adopted different criteria of sincerity.  
 
The above discussion should not suggest that young people have been the only ones to raise the 
question of the communist past and the historical guilt. These problems have by no means been 
an issue for the youth only – ever since the regime change, they have been generally present in 
the public discourse. Instead, my account should have brought to the fore some of the specific 
reasons that have made young people vitally interested in the communist past at all. The point is 
not only that their formative generational experience or their youth predisposes them mentally to 
pose these questions. Their age alone is a symbol which makes this psychologically easier for 
them, since they can hardly be fought back by the same discoursive ammunition. And it is the 
communicative barrier – aggravating full mutual understanding with the older about the moral 
dimension of their common past – that in turn makes them feel generationally alienated and 
eventually curious. 
 
Confronted with the question of historical guilt, eventually even the culprits come to see 
inadequacy of such arguments. It therefore comes as no surprise that publicized biographical 
interviews concerning life in the communist past have so far almost exclusively been reserved 
for either clear dissidents (expelled from work and sometimes imprisoned by the communist 
regime) or the undoubted representatives of the communist regime, the top functionaries 
amounting to about the same small number as the dissidents.187 This is no longer due to a lack of 
interest on the side of the interviewers (sociologists, journalists, etc.), political celebrities of the 
communist regime on both sides have already given their accounts, repeatedly. Josef Alan, the 
Czech sociologist, tried to break this silence by the end of the 1990s, and he still encountered a 
persistent reluctance to speak: “Many of those confronted with the question of what the 
Communist Party meant in their lives refused, politely yet categorically, to respond. Others 
                                                 
187  Miroslav Vaněk and Pavel Urbášek, eds., 2005. Poražení?-Vítězové? Životopisná interview. 
(Losers?-Winners? Biographical Interviews.) (Praha: Prostor, 2005). 

 

204

reacted as if they were subject to torture – and this was not only the case of the former 
Communist party Members. In this sense, an auto/biographical research all too much reminds of 
vivisection.”188 Alan’s study astutely captures the phrase of non-contemporaneity of the 
contemporaneous: “Those who lived through a different time than in which they talk about their 
past lives, in fact anticipate this ‘incomprehensibility’. They suspect how difficult it is to explain, 
clarify and rationalize anything – especially before their own children. In effect, it means to 
accept that by part of their lives they do not belong to the present, that they even can represent 
relicts of the regime despised by all, including by themselves.”189 
 
Here we come to the generational core of the cultural concept of trauma. A direct historical 
experience acquires traumatic nature when it becomes difficult to communicate this experience 
across generations because of its enormous complexity, at least in the eyes of those concerned. 
The bearers of such experience easily convince themselves that those who did not live in their 
past, can never fully understand it – a paradigmatic generational statement. They do not want to 
explain, since their contemporaries do not need any explanation, and the younger generation 
would not take it anyway. If there is any reason to apologize at all for their past misdeeds, there 
is nobody around to apologize to. The guilt is too general, and the young would have been the 
same had they lived in the same time – just another excuse.  
 
The post-communist memorizing of the communist experience once again reveals the 
paradoxical nature of collective trauma: trauma is transferred from one generation to another 
because of the difficult communicative transferability of the experience to which it refers. What 
is traumatizing is not the past experience itself but the situation, in which this experience gets 
dramatized in acts of collective memorizing. Yet it is the dramatized and compulsive process of 
collective memory that, at the same time, poses insurmountable barriers to this experience being 
communicatively shared among generations. 
 
 
 

 

                                                 
188 Alan, op. cit., 168 
189 ibid., 169 

 

205

 

“1974” as Cultural Trauma 

Victor Roudometof & Miranda Christou   

(University of Cyprus) 

 

  

 

THIS VERSION MAY 11th 2009 
 
No  one  could  have  ever  conceived  that  the  treacherous  coup  and  the  Turkish  invasion  that 
followed  it  in  1974  would  overturn  the  smooth  course  of  time;  these  age-old 
habits and folkloric traditions. Along a line of other tragic consequences in our 
lives  and  the  development  of  our  land  and  its  people,  the  blow  to  our  mores, 
customs and the traditions of our land was devastating. 

Demetris Christofias 
President of the Republic of Cyprus, February 9, 2009 190 

This paper outlines the major manifestations of 1974 as a cultural trauma for Greek 

Cypriots and elaborates on the implications of this trauma in the context of the “Cyprus issue.” 
191 Greek Cypriots remember “1974” as the Turkish invasion that displaced around 180,000 
people, caused the death of hundreds and resulted in 1,619 missing persons192 and the island’s 
semi-occupation. As a message repeated in almost every official talk, the president’s words are 
not exceptional even as they assert the exceptionality of a profoundly traumatic event: “1974” is 
a cultural trauma for Greek Cypriots not only because it left “indelible marks upon their group 
consciousness” but also because it is experienced, until today, as an event that changed “their 
future identity in fundamental and irrevocable ways” (Alexander, 2004a: 1). In this paper, we 
explain how “1974” became a cultural trauma for all Greek Cypriots through its 
commemoration, institutionalization and routinization.  

In particular, we use cultural trauma theory to analyze the processes through which Greek 

Cypriots have interpreted the 1974 events as a painful trauma that shapes their current identity. 
In the first section, we establish scope restrictions, unpack some theoretical issues and sketch the 
social processes that fuelled the construction of 1974 as a cultural trauma. Next, we expand our 
analysis into trauma routinization. In this section, our objective is to show how everyday rituals 
are evocative of the trauma and how they echo and reproduce the trauma in Greek Cypriot 
culture. Finally, we examine the problematic nature of the trauma’s transmission and 
                                                 
190 Talk given by the president of Cyprus in commemoration of the occupied community of Kondea, at the church of 

Ayios Charalambos in the Geri refugee housing project. Translation by authors. Full text in Greek at 
http://www.cyprus.gov.cy/moi/pio/pio.nsf/All/8D2BEC4C716A7A46C2257558005C485C? Opendocument 
(Retrieved March 4, 2009). 

191 The “Cyprus Issue” is a term used to describe the unresolved situation of conflict on the island since 1974. The 
United Nations have used the term in various resolutions adopted by the General Assembly. It could be argued 
that from the perspective of the unilaterally declared Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC, since 1983) 
there is no “Cyprus Issue” but a problem of TRNC’s international recognition.    

192 This number was the official estimated figure for the Greek Cypriots who went missing in July and August of 

1974. This estimate has been continuously revised, especially since the beginning of excavations by the 
Investigative Committee for Missing Persons (established in 1981) in August 2006. For more on the politics of the 
recovery of missing persons in Cyprus and the controversy on determining their actual number see Cassia (2005; 
2006). 

 

206

