 
Preface 
 
Child of a working class family, I was born in late 1950s. Less than a year before my birth, my 
family had to move to Athens, the capital of Greece, where ever since 1950 dozens of thousands 
of inner immigrants have been moving in. Abandoning their home villages for a better life, all 
these  people  had  to  sort  out  the  new  urban  setting  with  limited  material  resources  and  social 
capital. So did my family; they had to adjust themselves into an unfamiliar social environment 
whose promise for upward mobility required much emotional energy and human cost. During my 
childhood I was occasionally witnessing quarrels between my parents and my ten years eldest 
brother over family issues mainly related to the coping with the harsh conditions of our everyday 
life.  What  was  striking  me,  or  what  I  currently  think  it  was  striking  me,  in  those  quarrels, 
particularly  whenever  carrier  and  life  chances  were  involved,  was  my  brother  addressing 
fervently  my  father  using  the  biblical  saying  the  sins  of  the  fathers  visit  upon  their  children. 
Upon  this  utterance  I  remember  my  farther  remaining  speechless,  with  his  facial  expression 
revealing embarrassment and a hidden desperation and then suddenly every discussion was over. 
For  many  years  I  was  at  odds  with  these  repeated  episodes  because  I  couldn’t  understand  or 
imagine what the sins of my beloved father might be, and how was it ever possible for that hard 
working and honest man to commit any sin at all. Insinuations and silence on this didn’t help 
much  until  my  adolescence  where  I  started  to  realize  the  meaning  of  the  words  ‘occupation’, 
‘resistance’, ‘resistance fighter’, and ‘exile’ which were mentioned by both my parents rarely in 
the house. As soon as I realized that the meaning of those words was somehow about my father, I 
came  to  feel  that  there  was  actually  no  puzzle  of  a  wrongdoing,  no  sin  committed.  On  the 
contrary, although he was a resistance fighter he was sent to a detention camp shortly after the 
liberation  from  the  Axis.  While  I  was  growing  up,  through  my  parental  identifications  and 
despite  the  fact  that  my  father  was  hardly  speaking  about  his  past  political  doings  and  about 
politics in general, I found it unjust; in time, around this sense of injustice I discovered myself to 
almost naturally belonging to the community of the Greek Left, whatever the vagueness of the 
word might be. Nonetheless, the embarrassment at his face and the silence related to that biblical 
saying, which sounded like a verdict, were a bit of an unsettled reminder in my mind, a bit of a 
mystery.  

At his 60s, when I was already a young man, he was ready to become somewhat more 
talkative about his experiences during the 1940s. Among others, I recall two things: first, he was 
emphatically  saying  that  he  ‘did  no  harm  to  anyone’  while  in  the  resistance;  second,  he  was 
describing  the  civil  war  as  a  big  mistake  and  a  drama.  Then  it  didn’t  escape  my  notice  that 
although  he  did  not  take  part  in  the  civil  war  in  any  conceivable  way  he  was  sharing  the 
responsibility for this ‘big mistake’. He was feeling guilty and humiliated and therefore he kept 
silent most of the time. Though he committed no wrongdoing he was feeling guilty because he 
identified himself with the defeated Left as a whole, as a declined imaginary community. The 
mystery was almost solved. 

My father’s state of mind reflected the mentality of an entire generation; the generation of 
the civil war whose experiences and memories were so much complicated, emotionally charged, 
and  negatively  marked  that  were  condemned  into  silence,  embarrassment  and  fear.  Those 
experiences and memories spill over the next generation precisely because the Greek civil war 
was not just a personal drama for all those who took active part in it but a cultural trauma which 
was meant to affect the entire social body and the body polity for several decades. In this paper I 

 

104

 

attempt to substantiate this claim by placing the war in its socio-historical and cultural setting. 
This  is  done  by  using  and  interpreting  evidence  from  past  historical,  sociological  and 
ethnographic  research,  on  the  one  hand,  and  original  qualitative  interviews  conducted  for  the 
purpose of this paper, on the other105.        

       
Historical context 
 
The Greek civil war was Europe’s bloodiest military conflict between 1945 and the collapse of 
Yugoslavia in 1992-5; besides, as a defining moment of the Cold War106, it has been the most 
prolonged and traumatic experience of Greece since its establishment as a nation-state in 1830’s. 
As every other civil war, it sprang out of a host of socio-historical and political cultural roots. 
Most  of  them  are  located  in  the  confrontations  of  the  interwar  period,  the  most  important  of 
which are (1) the national schism between republicans and royalists, (2) the newcomers who fled 
the  lands  of  Asia  Minor  vs  autochthones,  and  (3)  the  Metaxas’  dictatorship  (1936)  and  the 
anticommunist  legislation.  To  be  sure,  these  divisions  were  much  less  intense  than  the 
intersecting cleavages which fueled the Spanish civil war (regional/ethnic differences, Catholics 
versus anticlerical groups, class conflicts). What is more, the Finnish civil war had a much more 
solid class basis thanks to the strong organizational unity of the workers’ movement in Finland 
so  that  it  can  be  seen  as  perhaps  Europe's  most  clear-cut  class  war  in  the  twentieth  century 
(Alapuro 2002). 
The national schism (Ethnicos Dichasmos), started with the different attitude of the King 
 
Constantine  and  the  Prime  minister  Eleftherios  Venizelos  towards  the  powers  of  the  Entente 
(Britain,  France  and  Russia).  The  King  insisted  on  neutrality  whereas  Venizelos  opted  for 
alliance with the Entente at the outbreak of the First World War. The real cause, however, lied in 
the unbridgeable differences of the two men with regards to political preferences. The politics of 
the King and of his supporters were deeply conservative whereas the politics of Venizelos were 
liberal  and  reformist.  After  internal  political  turmoil  between  royalists  and  republicans  and 
pressure from Entente, the King without abdicating went into exile (1917) but returned to the 
throne in 1920 after the defeat of Venizelos in the national elections of a country exhausted after 
eight years of wars.  
 
As a result of the 1919 peace treaty, in 1921 the Greek Army, under the command of 
Constantine himself, undertook a major expedition in Asia Minor which, however, was ill-fated.  
In August 1922 the Turkish Army under Mustafa Kemal in a counter-offensive forced the Greek 
troops out of Asia Minor altogether and demolished Smyrna which was virtually a city of Greek 
diaspora. About 1,500,000 refugees fled to Greece from Asia Minor. This “catastrophe” resulted 
into  the  abdication  of  the  King,  put  an  end  to  Greek  irredentism  and  gave  rise  to  the  strain 
between refugee newcomers and autochthones. The frail economy of the country burdened by 
foreign indebtedness and the huge cost of waging wars for a whole decade was at pains to sustain 
the refugees most of which faced social hardship, discrimination and humiliations of all kinds.   
                                                 
105  Thanks  to  my  MA  student  Katerina  Koronaki  for  her  valuable  contribution  in  this.  We  contacted  eleven 
informants; eight of them are left minded, and three right minded. All of then took part in the civil war.    
106 Even more bloody, the Spanish civil war (1936- 1939) was the terrain of the confrontation between Fascism and 
anti-fascist forces. The defeat of the Left in that war heralded the domination of the Axis for almost a decade. The 
defeat of the Greek Left announced the sheer political and diplomatic domination of the USA in the country for 
three decades or so.   

 

105

 
In the census of 1928 the Greek population had risen to 6,204,674 out of 5,016,589 in 
1920. The large influx of the refugees set in motion a significant left-wing labor movement in the 
urban centers and an acute problem of agrarian reform in the countryside. Along with this there 
was  a  widespread  anti-royalist  feeling  which  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  the  First  Greek 
Republic  (1924-1936).  Yet,  due  to  the  interwar  economic  depression  and  the  persisting 
confrontation  between  royalists  and  republicans  parliamentary  democracy  was  suspended  in 
1936  by  the  dictatorship  of  the  dedicated  royalist  General  Ioannis  Metaxas.  The  new  regime, 
supported if not directed by the King himself, was successful enough in destroying the Left by 
implementing anticommunist legislation and taking such harsh measures as exile, imprisonment 
and repressive surveillance.   

To  the  triple  (German-Italian-Bulgarian) Axis  occupation  of  the  country,  1941-1944,  a 
noticeable grass roots resistance was enacted; quite soon though it provided an opportunity for 
the leftist – mainly communist- political forces to organize themselves in a massive scale for the 
first  time,  inspired  by  the  anti-imperialistic  strategy  of  the  Third  International.  This  was  in 
tandem with a spirit of resistance and the general leftward shift spread throughout the occupied 
Europe.  In  Greece  and  Yugoslavia  the  resistance  developed  into  a  massive  emancipatory 
movement with internal discrepancies as well as impressive results against the occupation forces. 
It  has  to  be  noted,  though,  that  one  should  not  overdo  with  the  resistance  by  any  sort  of 
idealization  while  analyzing  the  Greek  or  any  other  European  country  in  the  1940s.  In  many 
countries  a  legend  of  an  all-embracing  ‘national’  resistance  was  constructed  and  forwarded 
immediately after the end of the war as a point of collective admiration which suppressed either 
the  toleration  to  the  occupation  forces  by  many  social  strata  or  the  dealings  and  deeds  of 
collaborators during and after the war.      

 The Axis occupation in Greece led to a breakdown of state and society. It has been well 
documented that during the occupation the victims of the famine in winter 1941-2, caused by the 
blockade  of  the  Greek  ports  by  the  British  navy,  the  plunder  of  the  natural  resources  by  the 
occupation  forces  due  to  the  lack  of  any  serious  system  of  their  supplying,  and  the  felonious 
mistakes of the public administration agencies responsible for the distribution of food, were in 
total  more  than  the  victims  of  the  bombings,  the  guerilla  war  and  the  retaliation  of  the  Axis 
troops107. Though exact numbers cannot be defined, it is estimated that the victims of the famine 
are almost 100.000 (Fleischer 1986).  

Under  these  circumstances,  the  prewar  ruling  elites  were  almost  totally  discredited  in 
view of their reluctance to undertake any serious resistance initiatives and their massive retreat to 
the Middle East. In this political vacuum, ordinary people took first efforts to keep themselves 
                                                 
107 Even nowadays the expression “occupation syndrome” refers to precautious and proactive consuming behavior 
based on the assumption that there might be no food in the near future. No doubt, the famine  marked collective 
memory in a decisive way. It can be argued that up to a certain point the roots and causes of the civil war stem not 
so much from the above mentioned cleavages but from the dissolution of the Greek society during the Occupation 
period and the antagonisms, animosities and hostilities it gave rise to: collaborators, black marketeers and so on. To 
be sure however, one should not exaggerate with the long last destructive consequences of the occupation as these 
were  used  in  the  construction  of  the  post  war  victimization  of  the  nations  involved.  After  the  war,  almost  each 
country constructed a powerful myth about the unprecedented destructions it suffered by the enemy, suppressing 
thus from the public memory the thorns of collaboration, the toleration of the Jewish genocide and ethnic cleansings 
executed either by the Axis forces or the resistance, as well as alignment with the occupation forces. On top of this, 
one  should  not  to  fail  to  underscore  the  incredible  corruption  with  which  the  Marshal  plan  was  implemented  in 
Greece so that huge amounts of money to end up in private pockets, frequently in those of collaborators, fanatic 
anticommunists and the power elite. For these groups the blaming of the Axis for the post war misery of the country 
was an easy bypassing to get away with their own responsibilities (Fleischer 2008: 135 etc).                                                                     

 

106

alive and to secure access to food; at a later stage a more organized pro-Allied resistance began 
mainly by communists. Acts of resistance and sabotage became frequent from the winter of 1941 
by  the  Ethniko  Apeleftherotiko  Metopo  (EAM:  National  Liberation  Front),  the  major 
organization of the left and the communists (Tsoukalas 1969: chapter 4; Clogg 1979). EAM was 
by far the largest and more powerful organization which in 1942 formed its own military branch, 
the  Ethnikos  Laikos  Apeleftherotikos  Stratos  (ELAS:  Greek  People’s  Liberation  Army) 
pronounced as “Ellas”, the name of the country itself. To be sure, the great majority of the people 
were not communists but very sympathetic to EAM and very many, including lots of women, 
jointed  it not only out of defiance against the German, Italian and Bulgarian occupation but also 
as an act of participation in social life from which have always felt excluded. According to Clogg 
(1979:150), «by the end of the occupation the membership of EAM has been variously estimated 
at between a million and two million». 

Other  resistance  organizations  such  as  the  Ethnikos  Dimokratikos  Ellinikos  Syndesmos 
(EDES:  National  Republican  Greek  League),  initially  of  liberal  democratic  tendencies,  soon 
developed an anticommunist orientation. Consequently, the resistance did not manage from the 
beginning to act in unison, apart from one or two major acts of sabotage in collaboration with 
British intelligence. Already in 1943 deadly battles and bloody skirmishes were taking place in 
the countryside and the Athens area between EAM/ELAS and various non-leftist organizations 
heralding thus the civil war which was to follow.  

In  March  5,  1946  Churchill  announced  his  notorious  “iron  curtain”  statement  and  in 
March 1947 the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan were launched. These dates tally with 
two crucial incidents of the Greek civil war: March 30, 1946 is regarded to be the conventional 
date  for  the  launching  of  the  conflict;  in  September  1947,  after  consulting  USSR,  the  Greek 
Communist  Party  decided  to  lead  the  war  to  its  climax  [the  limnes  (lakes)  plan].  These 
correlations indicate the inexorable engagement of the Greek civil war with the setting out of the 
Cold war. As a matter of fact, the civil war in Greece was the first paradigmatic case where the 
USA, on the one hand, invoked the domino theory, and tested their credibility as the world leader 
against  communism,  on  the  other.  From  their  part,  Stalin  and  Tito  handled  the  Greek  case 
according to their mutual relations and the cross pressures exerted on them in the UN. For the 
USA, the confrontation with the Greek Communists (no political compromise and smash of the 
enemy)  served  as  a  model  in  their  later  entanglement  in  Guatemala,  Lebanon,  Cuba,  Saint 
Dominican and Vietnam (Kolko 1994: 373-395, Coufoudakis 1981, Iatrides 2002). 

It has to be stated emphatically that, seen in a historical perspective and from the vantage 
point of the present, the Greek civil war was a multifaceted phenomenon. First of all, it was a 
total  war  which  involved  armed  and  civilians,  orthodox  and  unorthodox  styles  of  military 
conflict.  Second,  with  some  sound  exemptions,  it  was  carried  out  almost  exclusively  in  the 
countryside108.  Third,  it  was  marked  by  great  local  particularities  and  exigencies.  These  have 
been recognized quite recently when certain scholars used alternative methodological tools in the 
study of the civil war: oral history, local memories and personal archives, discourse analysis and 
                                                 
108  The  Left  in  the  cities  survived  the  civil  war  with  much  less  damage  compared  with  the  rural  areas,  and  that 
explains  why  it  scored  quite  high  in  the  1950s’  general  elections.  In  the  1958  election,  particularly,  the    Eniea 
Demokratiki Aristera (United Democratic Left) received 24,4% of the vote and became the major opposition party. 
Unlike the Spanish case, while the civil war was waged in Greece the regime remained democratic. Paradoxically or 
not,  even  when  executions  were  performed  in  late  ‘40s  and  early  ‘50s,  the  country  was  run  by  a  center-right 
government.  That  government  and  those  to  come  over  the  next  two  decades  until  the  1967  coup  de  etat  were 
patronized by the USA embassy and acted according to double legal standards: an emergency legislation against the 
Left and a ‘normal’ rule of law for the rest, alleged to be nationally minded.     

 

107

so  on  (Marantzides  2002;  Kalyvas  2000,  2002,  2003;  Sakkas  2000).  Often,  events  in  local 
context diverted from the great politics of the decision-taking headquarters and as a consequence 
the cleavages of the central political scene had little or even no impact on the local politics where 
personal  and  kinship  relations  and  hostilities  were  of  primary  importance.  It  has  been 
documented that, as the micro-foundation of the macro-structure of the civil war is more crucial 
than  it  was  thought  one  or  two  decades  ago,  mediating  mechanisms  and  procedures  such  as 
ethnic  origins,  religious  attachments,  local  networking,  family  ties,  local  traditions,  local 
violence, interpersonal relations etc play an important role for the recruitment to this or the other 
side  of  the  conflict,  the  persistence  of  the  commitment,  and  the  selective  incentives  in 
participating or abstaining from the war (Margarites 1989: 507-9; Mylonas 2003). 
 
The Greek civil war as a research topic. A rich but tormented bibliography  
 
It has not been always easy to do research and make publications on the Greek civil war; for 
several decades it was a taboo of public life and scholars were reluctant to deal with it due to non 
accessible archives until early 1980s and suspicious or even hostile political climate. Systematic 
scholarly  work  started  after  the  political  changeover  of  1974  (the  collapse  of  the  seven  years 
military dictatorship), but took off in early 1990s by historians, social anthropologists, political 
scientists, sociologists and social psychologists. Gradually, the number of local and international 
conferences on the civil war has been growing up indicating thus that it is not a taboo any more 
(Dordanas & Michaelidis 2007). Ever since 1984, seventeen conferences have been organized 
mainly  in  Greece  as  well  as  abroad  with  the  Network  for  the  Study  of  the  Civil  Wars 
(http://www.elia.org.gr/civil_war_greek/index.htm),  founded  in  2000,  to  be  one  of  the  major 
actors in this sort of academic activity.  Roughly speaking, the rationale of all this academic and 
scholarly activity has been the redirection of attention from the question “Whose fault was it?” 
towards  the  question  “How  did  the  civil  war  take  place?”  (Marantzidis  &  Antoniou  2004; 
Mazower 2000: 8). 

 Yet, the situation is somewhat more complicated; scholars not only dispute over definite 
aspects of the civil war but over the ways it should be studied. To my opinion, these disputes are 
indexical  of  the  pertinently  discordant  effects  of  the  civil  war  in  many  social  milieus,  the 
academics and the intelligentsia included. But let me be more explicit.  

a) Respecting the duration of the civil war, for many years and as indicated above, the 
mainstream position was March 30, 1946 to August 29, 1949. Yet, this has been disputed lately 
and a ‘When it started vs When it ended’ controversy is taking place among political sociologists 
and historians in Greece. Among others, the criterion is what makes an armed conflict within a 
state  into  a  civil  war.  This  is  a  controversy  that  draws  on  from  both  the  literature  of  the 
comparative  studies  of  civil  wars  (Fearon  &  Laitin  2003,  Sambanis  2002)  and  the  retroactive 
stakes of the Greek political scene. For some, it is more appropriate to speak of civil military 
conflicts  during  the  occupation  period  when  one  refers  to  the  armed  confrontations  between 
ELAS and EDES in 1943, rather than of civil war. For them, a civil war presupposes a durable 
and large scale of military mobilization which actually occurred in the 1946-1949 period. In their 
point  of  view,  the  1944  December  events  (Dekemviana)  where  a  short  but  dreadful  struggle 
between ELAS, the British troops and the newly formed  Greek gendarmerie, staffed mainly by 
collaborators,  sparked  three  months  after  the  liberation,  cannot  be  seen  either  as  a  civil  war 
(Margarites 1989).  

 

108

On the other hand, there are scholars109, whose positions I tend to endorse, arguing that 
conflicts between Greeks during the resistance period can be regarded as civil war irrespective of 
their sporadic or intermittent nature, provided that contradictory and mutually exclusive socio-
political projects lay behind them. A similar situation one can observe nowadays in Iraq where 
civil and inter-ethnic conflicts coexist with resistance to the American and British troops.  

Another similar issue raised in the debate is whether the 1945-1946 right-wing violence 
which sprung after the Varkiza Agreement against the defeated followers of EAM/ELAS signals 
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  (Mazower  2000:  6-7,  31-2).  Among  others,  according  to  that 
agreement, signed in February 1945 as a result of the end of Dekemvriana, the guerilla units had 
to  withdraw  and  surrender  their  arms.  Subsequently,  the  offenses  committed  during  the 
Dekemvriana were pardoned except ‘common-law crimes against life and property which were 
not  absolutely  necessary  to  the  achievement  of  the  political  crime  concerned’.  This  clause 
provided  the  excuse  to  ultra-right  and  royalist  bands  for  launching  a  mass-scale  violence  and 
terror  against  members,  followers  or  even  sympathizers  of  EAM/ELAS  (Voglis  2000:  74-5). 
Nowadays, a considerable part of the right-wing historiography accepts the description of these 
events as “white terrorism”, and a minimum of consensus seems to be formed around this. Yet, a 
crucial issue is raised, mainly by left-leaning scholars, as to whether that was a “unilateral civil 
war” – which was to be followed soon by the “bilateral civil war” -,  or it can be seen as the real 
beginning of the civil war, pulling thus its opening date one calendar year backwards, i.e.1945 
(Koulouris 2000: 52-4).         

b) By and large and for many years, the Greek scholars seemed to stay aloof or ignore the 
results of the international research on civil wars, remaining therefore highly Hellenocentric and 
ethnocentric rather than comparative and non-parochial (Mylonas 2003; Marantzidis & Antoniou 
2004). Most interpretations were swept by the left-right cleavage and the imperatives of the Cold 
War. As a result, the ethnic dimensions of the war were overlooked as well; for instance, until 
recently,  the  vicissitudes  of  the  Slavophonic  population  and  the  strategies  of  the  Turkish-
speaking groups during the war were particularly under-researched. Also, the extermination of 
about 100,000 Greek Jews has been hardly researched and analyzed systematically in most of 
scholarly works on the civil war.  

c)  Currently,  a  heated  controversy  between  traditional  historians  who  base  their  work 
chiefly if not exclusively on the study of archives and a respectable group of younger and post-
revisionist scholars who bring in oral history, memory and local studies, and clinical approaches 
is taking place. The thrust of the dispute is about the appropriateness of the oral and local history 
methods and the possible disintegration of the field through topical approaches and piece meal 
studies.  Most  clearly,  the  traditionalist  argument  holds  that  scrutinizing  written  sources  as 
opposed to oral testimonies is the right method to study the civil war to the extend that these 
sources are objective and not self-selected. Yet, the proponents of this argument tend to overlook 
that, very often, written documents are produced and distributed in an equally selective manner. 
In addition, they claim that by focusing on local histories and personal memories, revisionists 
conclude  to  a  fragmentation  of  the  subject  matter,  loose  the  macro-analytical  perspective  and 
contribute  to  the  relativisation  of  historical  reality.  It  should  be  noted  that  in  this  controversy 
both left and right-leaning scholars are involved in an intersecting way. 

A clear-cut, though, distinction between left and right-leaning approaches can be found in 
the non academic bibliography on the Greek civil war.  On the whole, it consists of propaganda 
                                                 
109 As early as 1969, Andreas Papandreou (1969) explicitly stated that the Greek civil war started at October 1943 
when ELAS troops attacked EDES. 

 

109

material, veterans’ memoirs, auto-biographies, biographies, diaries, illustrated texts, congresses 
and  conventions  minutes  and  the  like  (Koulouris  2000).  Since  the  non-academic  writings  are 
closely related to the waving of political climate, researchers have distinguished two periods in 
the production of this sort of writings:  (a) 1945 - 1974 where two out of three books published 
were anti-left; (b) 1974 – 2000s where four out of five books were left-minded (Marantzidis & 
Antoniou  2003,  2004).  It  is  note  worthy  that  almost  half  of  the  right-wing  production  was 
published  within  the  first  decade  after  the  end  of  WWII,  whereas  most  of  the  left-wing 
production appeared in the 1980s. On the one hand, this reflects the urge of the victorious right-
wing  hegemonic  bloc  to  forward  its  own  narration  as  soon  as  the  war  was  over;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  massive  publication  of  memoirs  and  auto-biographies  after  the  1974  political 
changeover  (the  so-called  Metapolitefsi)  and  especially  after  1982,  when  the  Socialist 
government recognized the national resistance, can be seen as a after-effect of the much more 
broader ‘explosion of collective memory’ and the rise of ‘public history’ which has been taking 
place since 1989 all around the globe (Voglis 2008; Panagiotopoulos 1997).  In effect, there are 
two different perceptions of the Greek Civil War image, the post-war Civil War and the post-
dictatorship Civil War perception.   

To sum up, the bibliography for the Greek civil war is quite rich as it consists of a large 
number of books and writings110. Naturally, though, it is divided and tormented by controversial 
issues, overt and covert political antagonisms, and unsettled dilemmas.   

 
 
Conceptual setting: The civil war as cultural-social trauma 

   

 

The notion of “cultural- social trauma” has been forwarded systematically as a distinct cultural 
sociological concept referring to institutional changes, to the constitution of collective memory 
and  to  forms  of  collective  action.  Formulated  alongside  the  tenets  of  a  weak  social 
constructionism, cultural-social trauma is meant to be “a memory accepted and publicly given 
credence by a relevant membership group and evoking an event or situation, which is (a) laden 
with  negative  affect,  (b)  represented  as  indelible,  and  (c)  regarded  as  threatening  a  society’s 
existence or violating one or more of its fundamental cultural presuppositions” (Smelser, 2004: 
44). According to Alexander (2004: 1) cultural trauma occurs when members of a collectivity 
feel  that  they  have  suffered  a  horrendous  event  that  leaves  indelible  marks  upon  their  group 
consciousness,  marking  their  memories  for  ever  and  changing  their  future  identity  in 
fundamental and irrevocable ways. From an intergenerational point of view, a cultural trauma is 
a  “chosen  trauma”  in  the  way  Vamik  Volkan  (2005)  puts  it;  i.e.  a  large  group's  unconscious 
“choice” to add to its own identity a past generation's mental representation of a shared event that 
has caused a large group to face drastic losses, feel helpless and victimized by another group, and 
share a humiliating injury. Apparently, the fundamental elements of the cultural trauma theory 
are: memory, emotion, and identity. In this respect, cultural sociology joins hands with the sub-
fields of memory, trauma and disaster studies. It is a complex area of theory and research which 
                                                 
110 It is indicative that between 1945 and 1999 a sum total of 576 books were published in Greek (Koulouris 2000). 
 

 

110

straddles the micro and the macro111, on the one hand, and the long and short duration of the 
historical time, on the other.     
 
The  Greek  civil  war  is  an  exemplary  case  of  cultural-social  trauma  of  considerable 
duration and significance. As already mentioned, it is the bloodiest conflict Europe ever faced 
between 1945 and 1990. To be sure however, since there is no agreement as to when the civil 
war starts, and given the collapse of the official agencies of public administration responsible for 
social statistics during the occupation period and shortly after the liberation, there is no precise 
measurement of casualties. According to official estimations, the number of dead were 40.000 
whereas  according  to  unofficial  estimations  their  number  gets  as  high  as  158.000  (Tsoukalas 
1969: 89). Up to 100.000 members of DSE (Dimokratikos Stratos Ellados: Democratic Army of 
Greece),  the  successor  of  ELAS,  crossed  the  northern  borders  and  migrated  in  communist 
countries for several decades. Those of Slavic ethnic origin are not allowed to return and settle 
back even today. Needless to say that material disaster of all kinds was much larger. On top of 
these one has to add the unprecedented hardship the country faced from the moment it entered 
the World War II until the eve of the liberation. From 1940 to 1944 almost 8 per cent of the 
entire population was killed and 34 per cent of the national treasure was devastated (Tsoukalas 
1969: 69). According to McVeagh, the Ambassador of the USA in Athens, in early 1946  the two 
thirds of Greece’s population were fed with only 1.700 calories per day (in comparison to the 
2.850  calories  of  the  British);  almost  30%  of  the  population  suffered  by  malaria  while  the 
percentage of tuberculosis was fifteen times higher than in Britain (Richter 1997: 434). Just after 
the end of the civil war in 1949 almost 10 per cent of the population (i.e.700.000 people) were 
homeless refugees waiting to re-inhabit their wrecked villages. In effect, the WWII and the civil 
war devastated almost entirely the Greek economy and really ravaged Greek society.   
 
 All  these  had  a  profound  impact  on  the  way  people  got  accustomed  with  all  sorts  of 
violence (Voglis 2002); we could argue that, on the one hand, the civil war rested on a culture of 
violence  inherited  from  the  occupation  period  (collective  retaliations,  mass  executions, 
deportation of local population -especially in the region of Eastern Macedonia occupied by the 
Bulgarians-, burning of villages, public exposure of the corps), which was amplified by black as 
well as by red terror,  on the other (Kalyvas 2002). Cruelties and atrocities from both sides and 
thousands of victims marked collective memories, hammered personal political identities and life 
projects, and changed the social fabric in a far reaching way.  

As a total social event, therefore, the Greek civil war has been experienced as a cultural-
social  trauma  because  it  affected  collective  memories,  group  consciousness,  and  the 
organizational  principles  of  the  Greek  society,  re-directing  its  orientation  for  more  than  three 
decades. It was not only caused by two almost mutually exclusive worlds; it created two opposed 
worlds  as  well.    For  25  years  the  most  overwhelming  consequence  of  the  civil  war  was  the 
cleavage  between  the  so  called  national  mindful  (ethnikofrones)  and  the  defeated  Left.  This 
cleavage permeated not only the political realm but every single social, economic and cultural 
arena.  It  intersected  with  the  above  mentioned  mid-war  cleavage  between  royalists  and 
republicans; thus the mid-war animosities were reinterpreted as much as the refugees from Asia 
Minor jointed EAM massively. In late 1960s, at a time where parliamentary democracy seemed 
to get consolidated and the post-civil war regime to loose ties, the traumatic cleavage of the civil 
war was enhanced and over-determined by the trauma of the seven years military dictatorship 
                                                 
111 As I have claimed elsewhere (Demertzis 2009), the affiliations between the psychoanalytic account of trauma 
and the notion of cultural-social trauma are more than it is usually admitted (Alexander 2004; 2003: 85-107).  
 

 

111

(1967-74). The coup d’etat blocked every outlet for the democratic incorporation of the ‘non-
nationally  minded’  in  the  political  system;  this  would  have  normally  occurred  if  the  general 
elections scheduled for May 1967 took place. As I have written elsewhere (Demertzis 2006), fear 
and insecurity returned to the left-leaning strata of the population who had staffed and socially 
supported  EAM,  EDA  (Eniaia  Dimokratiki  Aristera:  United  Democratic  Left)  and  EK  (Enosi 
Kentrou:  Union  of  the  Center),  the  parties  which    challenged  the  dominance  of  ERE  (Ethniki 
Rizospastiki  Enosis:  National  Radical  Union),  the  governing  right-wing  party.  On  top  of  the 
cultural trauma of the civil war, there now came the trauma of the imposition of dictatorship and 
the humiliation of the defeated was not lifted but, on the contrary, accentuated.  

For  all  its  horrendous  impact,  it  is  my  conviction  that  the  Greek  civil  war  was  not  an 
inevitable historical event; things could have happen otherwise and follow another direction. It is 
indicative that during the war the KKE (Kommounistiko Komma Ellados: Communist Party of 
Greece)  forwarded  twenty  one  different  plans  for  peace,  whereas  the  British  and  the  Greek 
government  offered  more  than  six  peace  initiatives.  Although  those  proposals  were  part  and 
parcel of the pull and push power game at the military, political and international arenas, one can 
retroactively  say  that  the  actors  themselves  had  some  freedom  and  the  discretion  to  choose 
another course (Sfikas 2002). Had all parties involved opted for a compromise as early as 1947 
or even 1948, the likelihood is that the conflict would not produce deep going consequences in 
the Greek political culture.  

Though  its  consequences  came  formally  at  an  end  in  1974,  when  democracy  was 
restored, the communist party- clashed in the meantime-, was legalized, and all civil rights and 
liberties were reinstated, the social psychological effects of the civil war are still pertinent, albeit 
not to the same extend as ten or twenty years ago. It may be true that nowadays scholars and 
students approach the civil war in a more distanced way, but it is equally true that it hibernates in 
collective  moods,  political  and  national  stereotypes,  and  social  memory(ies).  This  can  be 
discerned in the current elite and mass attitude towards the (Former Yugoslavian) Republic of 
Macedonia  a  considerable  part  of  whose  inhabitants  consists  of  DSE  fighters  of  Macedonian 
ethnic origin.  

 
 
 

The discursive-symbolic construction and reconstruction of the civil war. 
 
We  know  that  an  event,  as  destructive  as  it  may  be,  will  become  or  produce  cultural-social 
trauma  when  connected  to  the  structure  and  logic  of  social  action.  A  cultural-social  trauma 
involves  the  realization  (with  both  meanings  of  the  word,  that  is  as  becoming  conscious  of 
something and as something becoming real) of a common plight. It has to be defined collectively 
as  such  in  order  to  influence  the  systems  of  reference  of  an  entire  society  or,  at  least,  of  a 
significant  part  of  it  and  change  established  roles,  rules,  habituses,  and  narratives.  In  other 
words,  it  has  to  function  as  a  total  social  event  and  not  just  be  the  aggregate  of  numerous 
individual experiences. A dislocating traumatogenic event, for example, a civil war, does not in 
itself constitute a “trauma”. In order to become “trauma”, it has to undergo a process of social 
signification;  namely,  it  has  to  be  signified  and  become  socially  accepted  and  constructed  as 
“trauma”. In what follows I shall attempt to outline the regime of signification of the Greek civil 
war so as to mark out some distinguishing characteristics as well as commonalities with other 
civil wars.  

 

112

 
The semantic designation of the war 
 
 If one wants to compare the Greek case with other civil wars in an effort to demonstrate its own 
particularities, one should point out the semantic designation of this war in its proper political 
cultural setting. Hitherto I have been referring to the Greek civil war making use of the English 
words ‘civil war’. Yet; one should bear in mind that in Greek there is no semantic equivalent to 
civil war; in fact, the Greek word which goes for civil war is emphylios polemos (internecine 
war, war within the same race). Civil war is premised on the notion of civil society and civil 
sphere; it presupposes individualized citizens who are organized along clashing collective goals 
and/or  interests  and  contest  over  the  definition  of  a  society’s  historicity,  to  use  Touraine’s 
terminology.  On  the  contrary,  the  Greek  universe  of  political  discourse  cannot  sustain 
linguistically  the  idea  of  inner-state  war qua  civil  war  precisely  because  it  has  been  endowed 
with a variety of pre and anti-modern social significations. This is due to the traditionally weak 
civil society; i.e., the making of the Greek state and polity in the nineteenth century, including 
the parliamentary sub-system, took place principally in a non or, to be more accurate, an quasi-
capitalist socio-economic environment (Mouzelis 1986, Charalambis & Demertzis 1993). As a 
consequence, Greek economic capital at large has been commercial rather than productive, and 
the socio-economic development has been thoroughly carried out by the state and not by a robust 
capitalist market. This model has made for the prominence of loose party structures, it has been 
conducive  to  clientelistic  electoral  politics  and  it  contributed  to  an  atrophic  civil  society 
(Demertzis 1997). More generally, in the absence of a deep rooted bourgeois culture, for more 
than  a  century,  Greek  society  developed  alongside  the  tenets  of  cultural  nationalism  and 
traditionalism  rather  than  on  political  and  socio-economic  modernity,  resembling  thus  what 
Riggs (1964) defines as “prismatic society”, i.e. a society with minimal differentiation and highly 
mixed structural functions. In other words, despite the modernization processes put forward since 
the last quarter of the 19th century, and the emergence of a still born class politics and interest 
intermediation in the inter-war period, the hegemonic political cultural setting within which the 
civil war took place was of a Gemeinschaft rather than of a Gesselschaft nature.  

As a strong civil sphere was missing and the communal habitus prevailed it follows naturally 
that the armed conflict between Greeks in mid 1940s was designated as internecine rather than as 
civil war proper. It was meant as a conflict within the same national family, between men and 
women of the same blood, namely between brothers rather than between opposing life projects 
and mutually exclusive societal interests within civil society. For this very same reason in the 
Greek language “public opinion” is translated as “common opinion” (koini gnome), as an opinion 
shared by everyone and not as an opinion formed publicly.  
As in other Balkan as well as eastern European countries, the nation-state in Greece, as a 
 
post-traditional mode of domination, is supported by what has been called cultural nationalism, 
i.e. an ideological discourse according to which the nation is far from being a human association 
premised  on  modernity’s  civic  liberties,  but  a  particularistic  ethno-cultural  community  of 
language,  religion,  tradition,  race,  habits,  romanticized  historical  memories  and  so  on  (Kohn 
1961: 329-30, 457; Sugar 1969: 19-20, 34-5; Mann 1992: 137-8; Demertzis 1996: 227-44). At a 
macro-level, this ethno-nationalist discourse provided an ultimate legitimacy of the societal order 
as  long  as  it  fosters  a  collective  self-representation  of  Greek  society  as  a  horizontal  and 
communal brotherhood.  

 

113

No wonder, therefore, that although in 1943-44 and 1945-46 EAM as well as the anti-EAM 
bloc were warning about the large scale imminent civil war (emphylios), during the period of the 
actual  fighting  (1946-1949),  both  sides  were  cautious  enough  not  to  use  the  word  emphylios 
polemos for the description of what they were taking part in. Had they employed such a semantic 
designation,  they  would  discredit  themselves  as  violators  of  the  transcendental  racial/national 
unity. To put it in another way: the constitutive civiclessness of the Greek civil war is explained 
by the moral, if not sacred, character of national community which imperatively precluded the 
actors from defining their doings in current time, as bloody and devastating as they might be, in 
line with the only available codification the universe of the Greek political discourse could offer 
them: as ‘internecine war’. Instead, both sides demonized each other and thus they were creating 
symbolically the proper enemy to kill. As long as it was morally unbearable to take responsibility 
for the waging of an internecine war, each rival struggled symbolically for the de-humanization 
of the other drawing legitimacy from the consensual myth of national-communitarian unity.   

Unable  to  follow  a  binary  discourse  of  civil  society,  the  contenders  adopted  a  moral  and 
nationalistic binary discourse evading thus to identify their conflict as internecine war.  For the 
Right,  on  the  one  hand,  the  1944  December  events  were  assigned  as  rebellion  and  their 
opponents were just rebels against the legal national government. Besides, the 1946-49 conflict 
was  a  war  against  bandits  and  outlaws  (symmoritopolemos),  a  war  against  communist  bandits 
who betrayed their country by pursuing to cut off a part of it and annex it to the Soviet bloc or 
offer it to the Slavs. The latter was premised by the anticipation that the DSE and its government 
(Prosorini Democratiki Kivernisi: Interim Democratic Government) would serve Bulgaria’s geo-
strategic  ambitions,  after  the  Soviet  Union’s  proposal  at  the  Peace  Conference  of  1946  that 
western Thrace, actually a Greek territory, should be conceded to the then socialist Bulgaria. To 
be sure, a couple of years before, as an occupation force, Bulgaria projected the annexation of 
the north east Greek Macedonia and put into practice a systematic plan of de-hellenization of the 
region. On top of that, three years later, at January 1949, the Greek Communist Party decided for 
the autonomy of Macedonia and the self-government of the Macedonian People. Although that 
decision was canceled five months later and proclaimed as an ‘error’, it gave to its opponents a 
perfect opportunity for propaganda and blame attribution.   

For  the  Left,  on  the  other  hand,  the  1946-49  inner-state  conflict  as  well  as  the  December 
events  was  described  principally  as  “people’s  liberation  war”,  “people’s  democratic  struggle”, 
“people’s self-defense”, “armed struggle of DSE”, “armed struggle”, or plainly “struggle”. The 
opponents of the Left were monarchists-fascists and reactionaries who gave up the country to 
British  and  American  troops,  whose  presence  was  interpreted  no  less  than  a  “second 
occupation”. Only after the December events the left-minded press referred sporadically to the 
possibility of an “internecine tearing” caused and led, as it were, by the British.   
Apparently, these semantic designations on both sides were the necessary symbolic arms 
 
which prepared the actors to hate and kill the enemy and to be ready to get killed themselves. Via 
an adversarial meaning-giving process, both sides were defending the nation, albeit in a different 
fashion; namely, the Right was defending the restoration of the national unity whereas the Left 
was concerned for the liberation and the reconstitution of the nation. For their advocates, both 
projects were of outmost significance that awarded legitimacy to violent and brutal actions, and 
moral superiority to each side’s own self-contained political outlook. At the end of the day, the 
paradox is that although everybody knew perfectly that the war they were waging was among 
Greeks no one dared to call it internecine war (Elephantis 2003: 96-7,143).  

 

114

 
Actually the above mentioned semantic designation of the Greek civil war should come 
as  no  surprise;  in  many  other  cases  of  civil  wars  one  can  observe  the  same  terminological 
civiclessness premised on the different dependency path of each country with respect to political 
modernity. To use a few examples, the word in Serbian/Croatian bratocibilački rat which means 
internecine war or war between brothers (armed conflict between Yugoslav peoples during the 
WWII and conflict within national communities later on). The Polish equivalent of the civil war 
is Wojna Domowa which means ‘domestic war’; in the feudal era,  civil war in Japanese was  
(cid:31)(cid:31)  =  Nairan  (internal  unrest)  whereas  in  the  present  era  was(cid:31)(cid:31)  =  Naisen  (internal  fight, 
internal war).  As ‘internal fight’ civil war is understood in the Chinese as well ((cid:31)(cid:31) =        ). In 
Czech there are two terminological versions of the concept:   the colloquial version is občanská 
válka; when it comes to the struggle with the collaborators in the WWII, Građanski rat  is the 
literary translation of ‘civil war’.   Similar but not identical is the terminological designation of 
the  Finnish  civil  war;  until  1970s,  where  the  consensus  politics  had  prevailed  and  the  sharp 
memories  of  the  war  were  alleviated,  civil  war  (kansalaissota)  was  very  much  in  use  by  the 
defeated Social Democrats, and class war (luokkasota) was in currency by left-wing socialists 
and Communists. The victors of the war named it ‘war for Freedom’ (vapaussota), or ‘war for 
liberation’ (as against the Russian imperialism). Contrary to the Greek case, the Reds in Finland 
were using ‘civil’ or ‘class war’ during the actual fighting in 1918 (Alapuro 2002).  
 
The memorization of the civil war 
 
 After the war was over and for the decades to come, the semantics and the political vocabulary 
changed. Here one should distinguish two periods where a symbolic battle for the hegemony of 
the public memory has been taking place:  

(a) During the period 1949-1974, the official account of the Right as well as the account 
of  the  right-minded  man  of  the  street  had  been  still  that  of  symmoritopolemos  (war  against 
bandits) or rebellion. On the contrary, as early as 1957 the KKE used for the first time the word 
emphylios polemos with regards to the 1946-49 inner-state violent clashes. Until then, the party’s 
elites  were  speaking  of  ‘liberating  war’  or  even  ‘revolutionary’  war;  especially  in  the 
countryside, people of the Left were speaking of the “second guerilla war” (deftero andartiko). 
In fact, that was a devastating period for the Left which was not only defeated in the war but it 
has  been  politically  excluded  and  marginalized  until  1974.  The  KKE  was  banned  and  the 
ideology  of  ethnikofrosini  (national-mindedness)  was  dominant  in  every  single  sector  of  the 
public  sphere.  Against  this,  and  probably  as  part  of  a  defense  mechanism  and  as  part  of  a 
symbolic struggle, the official Left and its ordinary supporters as well the anti-monarchist camp 
gradually adopted wholeheartedly the term emphylios polemos as a tragic phase of contemporary 
Greek history whose victim is the Greek people in toto.   
 
(b) From 1974 onwards a spectacular change took place in the memorization of the civil 
war.  With  the  restoration  of  democracy  and  especially  after  the  1981  general  elections,  when 
Socialists, led by Andreas Papandreou, took office for the first time in the country’s history, and 
after the legal recognition of the resistance (Law 1285/1982), symmoritopolemos was virtually 
banned from the public and official political language of the Right. This was the aftermath of the 
unprecedented  long  lived  hegemony  of  a  leftward  political  culture,  endowed  with  plenty 
nationalist-populists  overtones  and  anti-americanism.  Since  then  emphylios  polemos  has  been 
univocally used in public speeches, in political documents, even in legislation and jurisprudence. 
Consequently,  according  the  1863/1989  Law  ,  symmoritopolemos  was  officially  replaced  by 

 

115

emphylios polemos whose duration was defined from 1944 to 1949. Besides the word ‘bandits’ 
(symmotites) was replaced by ‘Democratic Army’ (Dimokratikos Stratos). That law was enacted 
by  the  three-month  coalition  government  of  the  Right-wing  party  of  Nea  Democratia  (New 
Democracy) and the Left-wing party of Synaspismos (Left Coalition) and apparently had great 
symbolic impact with respect to the abrogation of the civil war consequences.   

  Seemingly,  along  these  symbolic  battles  a  politics  of  oblivion  was  gradually  put  into 

effect. In the remainder of this section I shall refer to some crucial constituents of this politics:  

(i)  With  respect  to  the  historical/official  memory,  the  date  of  the  end  of  the  civil  war 
(1949, August 29th) has never been celebrated as a National Day. Of course, there were a number 
of minor and local celebrations and political rituals with reference to the communists’ victims, 
but the end of the civil war as such was not commemorated in any substantial way, as it was the 
case in Franco’s Spain. Likewise, for all the devastation incurred by the WWII, in Greece May 
the 8th is not celebrated as the end of the Big War. Instead it is the 28th of October, the day of the 
beginning of the victorious Greek-Italian war, which is celebrated as a National Day112. Since 
the end of the WWII almost coalesces with the beginning of the civil war, the winning national 
elite didn’t wish to connect the two events (Voglis 2008). 

(ii) More so than it already was in the fifties and sixties - with the exception of the seven 
years  dictatorship  (1967-1974)  whereas  references  and  allegations  to  the  civil  war  were  made 
more often-, an effective by-passing of the civil war from the official memory was accomplished 
in 1982, shortly after Papandreou’s government took office (see above). The official recognition 
of  the  resistance  of  various  groups  and  of  course  EAM  was  characterized  as  ‘National 
Resistance’  which  is  ever  since  officially  commemorated  in  November  25,  with  not  much 
enthusiasm  though;  that  day  in  1942  a  major  sabotage  against  the  Axis  was  accomplished  in 
common  by  ELAS  and  EDES.  Typically  the  recognition  was  conferred  to  the  individual 
resistance  fighters  who  were  awarded  an  appropriate  title  and  pension.  Apparently,  a 
mythologization had been taking place since the period of resistance (1941-4) was cleaned up 
from  any  disturbing  stains  of  internecine  conflict  and  radical  -if  not  virtually  revolutionary-, 
projects, subjugated entirely to the nationalist discourse. Sometimes, the retroactive recall of the 
resistance period is accomplished through metaphysical and almost religious metaphors; one of 
our  informants  said:  [  …  whoever  lived  that  era,  whether  today  is  in  the  right  of  left  side,  is  like 
receiving the Holy Communion, as if one drinks fresh water from a source, it is something you get power 
from…](woman, aged 84). By this token, the old names of hundreds of streets and squares all 
over the country were changed overnight into ‘National Resistance’. In a prominent and historic 
square in the center of Athens a great statue was erected dedicated to ‘national reconciliation’. In 
contradistinction,  the  public  commemoration  of  the  civil  war  is  rare  and  sporadic,  inflicting 
sometimes embarrassment and bitterness. A ritual of great significance for the ‘nationalization’ 
of the resistance and the promotion of ‘national reconciliation’ was the ceremonial and widely 
mediatized burning of hundred of thousands, if not millions, of police files of the so-called ‘non-
nationally  minded’  citizens  which  took  place  in  29.08.89  in  spite  the  objections  of  Greek 
historians.     

(iii) If officially the national resistance was forwarded as a ‘chosen glory’ (Volkan 2005), 
and even if the official, not to say hegemonic, attitude was that of silence and forgetting, at the 
level of collective/popular memory and living political culture the situation has been quite more 
complicated.  As  Halbwachs  (1992:  172,  182)    Connerton  (1989:  38-99)  and  Aguilar  (1996) 
                                                
112 For quite different reasons, the Baltic countries do not celebrate the 8th of May either; for them the real liberation 
came on 1991 when the Soviet empire collapsed. 

        

 

 

116

rightly  argue,  collective  memory  is  by  definition  multifaceted  and  divided  alongside  the  lived 
experiences  and  local  memories  of  different  groups  and  individuals  who  witness  and  shape 
historical events, notwithstanding their traumatic potential. At the level of unofficial collective 
memory, therefore, the civil war has been recollected antagonistically until the early 1980s. Even 
if until then the political discourse implied silence on the matter, the undercurrent interpretations 
were sharply incommensurate (Voglis 2008)113. A divided collective memory emerged not only 
alongside the binary opposition between Left and Right but in accordance to a variety of local 
animosities  and  struggles  amidst  which  frequently  the  roles  of  victims  and  perpetrators  were 
mixed and interchanged.  

(iv)  It  is  misleading  to  draw  too  sharp  a  line  between  the  official/public  and  the 
collective/popular  memory;  in  the  on-going  hegemony  process  bridges  are  built  and  various 
kinds of overlapping are formed. By and large, on both sides silence about the civil war is the 
dominant  attitude.  With  some  exceptions,  even  nowadays  the  mnemonic  community  of  the 
defeated Left is built around the resistance rather than the civil war. This is repeatedly observed 
in  numerous  testimonies  and  narratives,  and  is  documented  in  the  qualitative  interviews 
conducted  on  the  occasion  of  this  paper.  Half  of  the  left  minded  informants  were  more  than 
reluctant to use the word emphylios polemos (civil war); as one of them mentioned: [… well the 
civil, I do not want to say the word, war between the Democratic Army and Governmental Army from ’46 
to  ’49  is  the  continuation  of  the  national  resistance  …]  (man).  According  to  another  one,  [… 
gradually,  after  1946  the  resistance  against  the  British  in  the  beginning  and  against  the  American 
afterwards has been named civil war] (man).      

The mnemonic community of the victorious Right is equally embarrassed with the civil 
war; I already mentioned that its victory was never celebrated as a national fest. A taboo issue is 
the  Greek  Security  Battalions,  which  were  collaborators  of  the  German  troops;  during  the 
December 1944 events they were the backbone of the anti-EAM forces and soon after most of 
their members jointed the National Army against DSE in order to escape legal prosecution for 
war  crimes.  Actually,  unlike  other  European  countries114,  in  Greece  the  punishment  of 
collaborators  was  extremely  poor  and  they  survived  precisely  because  they  served  the  anti-
communist  cause  (Haidia  2000).  In  addition,  large  parts  of  the  newly  formed  post-war  ruling 
class were has roots in collaborators and black market dealers during the occupation or usurpers 
of Jewish property. As a consequence, these things are preferable to suppress than to recall, let 
alone to be pride of. All in all then, in both Left and Right community of memory and political 
discourse the fatal ‘national tragedy’ of the civil war has been systematically juxtaposed to the 
‘epic of national resistance’.              

This  politics  of  oblivion  bears  witness  two  defense  mechanisms  Smelser    (2004) 
underscores  as  to  cultural-social  trauma:  ‘displacement’  and  ‘projection’  with  regards  to  the 
attribution of responsibility and the rationalization of trauma. The 1946-49 civil war is ultimately 
interpreted as the outcome of British and US intervention in Greek political life; the December 
1944  events,  let  alone  the  1943-44  conflicts  between  ELAS,  EDES  and  the  Greek  Security 
Battalions  are  scarcely  mentioned  openly.  Scapegoats,  expiatory  victims,  and  conspiratorial 
explanations  of  history  have  been  more  than  frequently  employed  to  identify  causes  and 
consequences  of  the  civil  war.  For  instance,  in  1945,  the  secretary-general  of  the  KKE 
                                                 
113 Among others, this is evidenced in the proliferation of the left-oriented publication of memoirs, auto-biographies, 
and diaries referred to above. 
114 In France, for instance, until 1945 almost 10.000 ‘traitors’ were killed with no trial. Later on, 1.600 were 
executed according to death verdicts (Fleischer 2008: 235).  

 

117

(Kommounistiko Komma Ellados: Communist Party of Greece) Nikos Zachariadis denounced the 
previous secretary-general and the majority of the party’s central committee for the December 
events, and in turn Zachariadis himself was officially denounced by his own party later on (1957) 
for the waging of the civil war. Hundreds of executive members who disagreed with the official 
decisions  were  physically  exterminated  by  the  party’s  death  squads  OPLA  (Organosi 
Perifrourisis  Laikou  Agona:  Organization  for  the  Protection  of  the  People’s  Struggle);  the 
accusation was spying and petty bourgeois mentality. To mention bypassing that the acronym 
OPLA sounds the same with the Greek word arms; it is more than obvious that this was a living 
metaphor designating death. 

 Apart from that, and in the years to come after the war, the self-representation of the Left 
was  that  of  the  expiatory  victim.  The  public  memory  of  the  leftward  side  selected  the 
innumerable atrocities it suffered by the so called “white terrorism” of the Right between 1945-
1946 as well as the unbearable prosecutions they endured during and after the war (executions, 
exile, imprisonments, rapes, tortures, social marginalization etc); at the same time however, they 
repressed or even disavowed their own malpractices, atrocities, and responsibilities115. Likewise, 
the Right has been more than reluctant to memorize about 5000 of its opponents executed by the 
extraordinary  courts-martial  and  nearly  70000  prisoners  and  exiles  who  were  convicted  from 
1947 to early 1950s. Yet, the public memory of the Right selectively detains the ‘red terror’ and 
the communists’ crimes.   
 
Besides, the attribution of responsibility for the civil war to the British and the Americans 
is  a  classic  example  of  the  conspiratorial  explanation  of  history,  quite  common  in  the  Greek 
populist  political  discourse,  either  Left  of  Right116.  Under  these  terms,  Greeks  in  toto  are  the 
expiatory victims of the foreigners. Another similar defense mechanism is the double tendency 
of remembering and forgetting. For one and the same traumatic event as the Greek civil war, 
precisely because it constitutes a field of competing interpretations and significations, there is, on 
the  one  hand,  the  demand  to  “leave  everything  behind  us”  on  the  name  of  ‘national 
reconciliation’;  on  the  other  hand,  however,  there  is  the  injunction  to  “preserve  our  historical 
memory” forwarded principally by the Right. Both options are cases of unsuccessful mourning 
and,  paradoxically,  in  spite  of  been  profound  political  options,  they  depoliticize  the  civil  war 
itself  by  subsuming  it  into  the  nationalistic  universe  of  discourse.  The  adversarial  political 
identities  of  the  opponents  of  the  1940s  are  symbolically  transfigured  to  extend  that  (a)    any 
revolutionary  or  counter-revolutionary  potential  of  the  civil  war  has  been  systematically 
suppressed  from  the  public  discourse  and  the  popular  memory;  (b)  the  opponents  were 
discursively endowed with non-political, nearly metaphysical, traits: noble defenders of the race 
and  the  nation,  on  the  one  side,  and    selfless  and  benign  patriots  who  chase  the  reactionary 
servants  of  imperialism,  on  the  other  side.  Even  the  bridging  of  the  opposition  described  as 
‘reconciliation’ instead of ‘compromise’ has its own significance; actually, ‘reconciliation’ is the 
counterpart  of  internecine  war  as  it  presupposes  two  formerly  homogenous  parts  which  only 
temporarily  have  been  put  apart.  On  the  contrary,  devoid  of  any  value  or  moral  echo, 
                                                 
115  There is ample evidence that even among the women political prisoners, the fighters who “held gun” were set 
apart and seen cautiously since the line of the party was that its members in prison were detained because of their 
opinions and not because of their doings.  
 
116 Likewise, the dominant account of the civil war in today’s Finland resides in the seemingly inconceivable revolt 
of a part of the people "against itself" by projecting the cause of the war outside the nation. Reds were "infected" or 
"misled" by the Russians to betray their own fatherland (Alapuro 2002).  

 

118

‘compromise’ is a political concept premised on power relations and convergence of strategic 
projects in a public sphere (Kotarides – Sideris 2002: 117-8).    
 
As a matter of fact, the above described politics of oblivion did not contribute to a sort of 
Vergangenheitsbewältigung,  i.e.  a  systematic  reappraisal  and  collective  process  of  coming  to 
terms  with  the  past.  Yet,  this  is  not  a  Greek  peculiarity;  in  all  countries  that  took  part  in  the 
WWII  there  are  some  dark  aspects  in  the  way  they  treat  their  past.  For  instance,  for  many 
decades in France a sort of national amnesia surrounded the Vichy issue and it was suppressed or 
unacknowledged that the great majority of the French gave credence to, or were aligned with, 
Petain and his regime. In equal measure, in Latvia it is denied that the biggest and perhaps the 
most  competent  non-German  military  force  embedded  in  the  Nazi  troops  during  the  WWII 
consisted by Letts and that among the most fanatic defenders of Hitler’s shelter in the combat of 
Berlin were Letts fighters. One of the most successful management of public memory ever in the 
post war European history is Italy’s self-characterization as victim and enemy of the Germans 
based  on  the  national  myth  of  the  good  Italian  (Italiani  brava  gente)  and  a  veil  of  silence 
obscuring that only at the very end of the war Italy declared the war to Germany, purging thus all 
war crimes and atrocities its troops committed in hands with the Nazis (Ricoeur 2004: 449-52; 
Fleischer 2008: 196, 209, 234, 246-7). To press the point further, the encomium of the resistance 
as opposed to the civil war in Greece is part and parcel of a collective myth and a hegemonic 
strategy for the definition of the public and collective memory. During the first post war years 
and later on, in many if not all Western and Eastern countries, the legend of an instant, popular 
and  mass  resistance  to  the  axis  served  as  a  symbolic  means  for:  (1)  national  (re)union,  (2) 
purging  of  plenty  anti-Semitic  atrocities  hidden  behind  the  Holocaust,  (3)  forging  a  common 
European  identity  (Fleischer  2008:  228,  236;  Antoniou  and  Marantzidis  2008:  14-5).  Greece, 
torn apart by Occupation and a civil war, could not be an exception.                         
 
The affect dimension during and after the war was over 
 
It was mentioned above that a host of left leaning non academic literature about the civil war and 
the  resistance  was  produced  after  1974,  when  the  democratic  regime  was  restored,    the 
communist party(ies) was recognized, and the ‘national resistance’ was legally acknowledged. 
Most of this literature was written by prominent actors of the 1940s. One of the central concerns 
of these writings was the reconstitution of the official memory of the Left and therefore the re-
articulation of the left identity within the new political cultural setting. This was accomplished 
by the overstatement of the communists’ contribution to the resistance and the understatement of 
their accountability for the civil war.  In the new political cultural setting and the new structure 
of political opportunities and constrains, the mnemonic discursive strategy of the communist left 
was entangled into a symbolic antinomy: by claiming the glory of the resistance they were no 
longer morally defeated, while at the same time they were still the victims of the post civil war 
state  of  political  affairs.  This  antinomy  has  been/is  grounded  on  two  mutually  exclusive 
mnemonic vectors: on the one hand, the silencing of the old sharp opposition to the class society, 
i.e. the ultimate stake of the communists’ civil war, and the affirmation of the national society 
they wanted to be part of, on the other. Effectively, this antinomy was premised on a particular 
sort of emotional reflexivity. By ‘emotional reflexivity’ I mean a sort of emotional dynamics, a 
capacity,  to  negotiate  relationships  by  changing  the  structure  of  feeling  and,  therefore,  how 
others feel within these relationships. It is a process in which social actors have feelings about 
and try to understand and alter their lives in relation to others (Holmes 2008). Accordingly, the 

 

119

defense  of  the  resistance  was/is  meant  to  de-stigmatize  the  Greek  communists  as  traitors  and 
national outcasts, while at the same time it was a symbolic means for transforming the trauma of 
humiliation they experienced after the defeat in the civil war into a full blown pride that deserves 
to  full  fledged  citizens.  The  de-stigmatizing  emotional  reflexivity  has  been  carried  through  a 
justifying  discourse  guided  by  a  militant  testimonial  zeal  (Panagiotopoulos  1994)  which,  as  a 
rule,  framed  the  Greek  communists  as  martyrs  of  the  homeland  during  the  occupation  and 
innocent victims of a revengeful state. It is not accidental that some of our reviewed subjects 
used  the  word  ‘Golgotha’  in  order  to  describe  their  experience  as  victims  of  the  war,  i.e.  a 
religious metaphor via which their activities acquire a non-political trait. Just only recently very 
few intellectuals of the Left deviate from this justifying discourse by discretely referring to the 
civil war as a strategic political option carried out by the Greek Communist Party in the 1940s 
and not as a fatal tragedy of the Greek people as a whole.  
 
The mnemonic discursive strategies of the Left and its emotional reflexivity cannot be 
properly interpreted unless taking into account the emotional consequences of the defeat in the 
civil war as well as the left emotional habitus during the decades before the war. To start from 
the  latter,  one  should  take  into  consideration  that  almost  from  the  beginning  the  political 
socialization of the Greek communists was carried out in an emotional climate of self-asserted 
marginalization. As an aftermath of the Bolshevists’ revolution, the Greek Communist Party was 
founded in 1918. From early on, the party as an institution and its individual members were at 
pains to comply with the official policies of the state as they departed from the directions of the 
Third International which were followed faithfully by the party in line with the Marxist-Leninist 
creed. In 1920 it strongly opposed the irredentist war in Minor Asia denouncing it as imperialist 
and  adventurous.  In  1924  it  supported  the  ‘unified  and  independent  Macedonia  and  Thrace’ 
propagating  the  idea  of  a  working  class  revolution  in  Greece  and  the  Balkans  (see  above).  
During  1929,  the  year  of  the  great  recession,  in  tandem  with  popular  sentiment  it  organized 
plenty  militant  rallies  and  strikes  which  resulted  in  severe  casualties  and  deaths.  In  1930  it 
unsuccessfully  declared  general  political  strike  and  advocated  the  establishment  of  the  soviet 
regime in Greece.  
 
The repressive apparatuses of the state responded harshly to these political projects by 
prosecuting hundreds of party members. What is more, the 1936 Metaxas dictatorship denounced 
the communist party as illegal; almost 2000 of its members and cadres were arrested or exiled 
and approximately the entire network of its organization was demolished by the secret police. 
Those who remained free had to follow strict conspiracy rules in their contact to each other and 
in their private everyday life.  
 
Given  the  quasi  religious  adherence  to  the  communist  utopia,  these  experiences  and 
practices  had  contributed  to  the  shaping  of  an  emotional  climate  and  habitus  of  strong  group 
mindness, suspiciousness against real or alleged police agents, traitors and revisionists within the 
party  ranks,  disciplinary  solidarity,  as  well  as  a  mentality  of  the  righteous  or  even  expiatory 
victim. By and large, this emotional habitus was reactivated during the resistance and after the 
defeat in the battle of Athens in December 1944 and the 1946-49 civil war. In effect, it was a 
defense mechanism for coping with disappointment and humiliation. Yet, it could not shield the 
defeated all the way through the process of humiliating self-negation imposed by the post-war 
regime (Voglis 2000).  
It  was  mentioned  above  that  thousands  of  people  were  arrested,  exiled,  imprisoned, 
 
murdered or executed from the December events and thereafter. In addition to the battleground, a 
moral and emotional war was taking place as well. All detainees in prisons or places of exile 

 

120

were pressed to sign declarations of repentance in which they recanted their political ideas and 
the Communist party itself. This method of demoralization was applied for the first time during 
the Metaxas dictatorship but during the civil war it developed into an industry of recantation. In 
thousands of cases, with my father’s being one of them, these declarations were signed after long 
and  painful  processes  of  physical  and  psychological  torture.  What  is  more,  these  declarations 
were widely publicized in the local and national press as well as in the small village communities 
the repentants were coming from; those who signed were forced to prove their true rependance 
by informing against comrades, sending public letters repudiating communism, and by joining 
the  military  police  confining  and    torturing  their  former  comrades  and  friends.  As  one  of  our 
informants said [ … violence was immense, psychological mainly but physical as well … the moment I 
was forced to sign they commanded us to take an oath and to write three letters … one to the priest of our 
parish, one to the gendarmery of our region … and another one addressed to the newspapers …] (man, 
aged 83). 

    Through this mechanism these people were ‘reformed’ into nationally minded citizens 
and willy-nilly negated their past identity as moral and political subjects (Voglis 2000: 76-7). 
Not  a  few  could  not  stand  a  humiliation  of  this  kind  and  committed  suicide;  a  very  tough 
emotional cross-pressure was exerted on all those who signed but did not alter their belief in the 
communist cause as they were stigmatized by both the authorities and the party itself. Activating 
the reflex syndrome of suspicion, the party organization treated these people not as politically 
defeated and physically exhausted subjects but as sinful and compromised individuals who could 
not manage to defend the moral superiority of the party.  
 
After  the  civil  war  was  over  thousands  of  left-wingers  who  were  morally  cancelled, 
politically marginalized, socially stigmatized and personally exhausted, forced to find refuge in 
the  big  cities.  For  them,  as  well  as  for  their  immediate  descendants,  defeat  functioned  as  a 
‘cultural  trauma’,  as  a  painful  event  whose  retroactive  processing  in  memory  and  discourse 
caused disruptions and reconstructions in their collective identity. Essentially, there was no place 
for left-wingers in the public sphere, who were treated as second-class citizens. Their political 
marginalization caused them fear, anger, embarrassment and angst.  
 
Essentially,  until  the  end  of  the  50s,  the  space  for  any  strongly  worded  discourse 
challenging the post-civil war establishment was extremely narrow. But since the beginning of 
the crucial decade of the 60s that space widened as, on the one hand, the ‘Union of the Center’ 
party (Ένωση Κέντρου) challenged the dominance of ERE (the right-wing dominant party) and, 
on the other, the economic development in the tertiary and manufacturing sector allowed for the 
massive  and  very  fast  accession  of  the  domestic  migrants  to  the  labor  market.  There  existed, 
however, an unbridgeable contradiction: while economic incorporation continues and creates the 
conditions for social consensus and the gradual de-EAMification of the petit bourgeois masses 
(Charalambis,  1989:  196),  the  structure  of  the  post-civil  war  state  (palace,  army,  national-
mindedness, etc.) did not allow for the lifting of their political exclusion. The petit bourgeoisified 
civil war defeated, already incorporated in the market and the consumerist way of life, demanded 
moral recognition and political representation. In the new socio-economic environment their fear 
gradually  gave  way  to  resentful  indignation.  It  was  precisely  because  their  social  opportunity 
structure had changed and therefore they were able to express the accumulated emotional energy 
and  transform  the  feeling  of  indignation  to  a  material-political  force:  where  else  could  the 
massive social rallies of the period be based and in what other way could they be expressed, if 
not in a mixture of indignation and hope? 
 
Yet,  under  the  prospect  of  losing  control  in  the  parliamentary  elections  scheduled  for 
May 1967, April’s coup d’etat in effect blocked every outlet for the democratic incorporation of 

 

121

indignation,  during 

the  not  nationally  minded  in  the  political  system  and  cancelled  the  mood  for  further  massive 
protests.  On  top  of  the  cultural  trauma  of  the  civil  war,  there  now  came  the  trauma  of  the 
imposition of dictatorship. So there was formed a belief in the fatality of political inequality and 
marginalization and the impossibility of its overcoming. The humiliation of the defeated in the 
civil war was not lifted but, on the contrary, accentuated. As I have argued elsewhere (Demertzis 
2006), the main consequence of the dictatorship in terms of cultural trauma analysis is that the 
contradiction  between  the  desire  for  political  and  moral  recognition  and  the  powerlessness  to 
impose it, combined with the chronic and traumatic reliving of endless vindictiveness, hostility 
and  indignation,  produced  a  deep-rooted  ressentiment.  Based  on  Max  Scheler  (1961)  I  regard 
ressentiment  as  an  unpleasant  moral  feeling  without  specific  addressees,  which  operates  as  a 
chronic reliving of repressed and endless vindictiveness, hostility, envy and indignation due to 
the impotence of the subject in expressing them in social practice. To the extent that dictatorship 
overturned  the  democratizing  potential  of  the  mid  1960s,  it  can  be  argued  that  a  significant 
portion  of  pre-dictatorial  resentment  qua  moral 
the  dictatorship 
dematerializes  and  is  transformed  into  ressentiment.  The  injustice  of  political  marginalization 
and  the  post-civil  war  establishment  were  perceived  to  be  an  inescapable  fate  leading  to  an 
experience of impotence and inferiority. However, as soon as PASOK took office in 1981 and 
the  lower  middle  strata  stemming  from  the  defeated  in  the  civil  war  (the  ‘non  privileged’  in 
Andreas Papandreou’s populist rhetoric) found themselves integrated into the political system, 
ressentiment  gave  place  to  vengeance  precisely  because  it  could  be  released  and  acted  out 
publicly. Party mass clientelism (Lyrintzis, 1984) and the ‘green-guards’ (PASOK’s cadres who 
dominated in trade unions, the public sector and state mechanisms) were the compensation for 
the ‘stony years’ of the political marginalization. But apparently vengeance cannot be the only 
emotion  stemmed  from  Papandreou’s  policies  favorable  to  the  former  political  and  social 
outcasts; many must have experienced disappointment combined with bitterness, a kind of half 
hearted satisfaction, when the National Resistance was recognized and they received, by law, a 
pension for their contribution to the country. What two of our interviewed said about it might 
reflect  a  more  widespread  mood:  […they  got  me  in  trial  for  high  treason  …  us  who  fought  the 
Germans … they give me a 320 euros pension … this is the way they compensate us … can you imagine? 
… here we had the greatest resistance throughout Europe…] (man, aged  85). [… we risked our lives 
and this makes us proud … those memories are great but painful, it is the most patriotic and heroic I’ve 
ever  lived.  Well,  nowadays  I  am  looking  at  my  self,  my  house  etc,  I’ve  become  a  petty  bourgeois  like 
others] (man, aged 83). 
 
Overall,  sixty  years  after  the  end  of  the  war,  our  left  minded  informants  experience 
retroactively a fusion of negative and positive feelings: rage, resentment, anger, disgust or even 
hatred together with pride, moral satisfaction and responsibility spring out from their narrations.     
 
 Contrary to what currently passes as left leaning common sense with regards to the civil 
war  trauma,  I  want  to  argue  that  this  war  was  traumatogenic  to  the  right  side  of  the  Greek 
political spectrum as well.     
   
       
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 

    ……………………………………………………………. 

 

122

of 

the 

by 

both 

sides 

(silence, 

pursued 

‘nationalization’ 

Stemming from a personal interest and in pace with the fundamental tenets of cultural trauma 
theory, i.e. identity, memory, emotion, a (re)interpretation of the Greek civil war was attempted 
throughout this paper. This interpretation was based primarily on the already existing impressive 
research literature, partly on findings from original qualitative research, and to some extent on 
comparisons  between  the  Greek  and  other  civil  wars.  After  sixty  years,  that  war  still  ignites 
Greeks’ political psyche, maybe not so fervently as the former decades. The main reason why 
this cultural trauma has repercussions after so many years is the partial failure of the politics of 
oblivion 
resistance, 
forgetting/manipulated  public  memory).  Alike  other  countries,  in  Greece,  a  systematic 
reappraisal and a coming to terms with the past has not been generated. As a result, despite the 
claims of national reconciliation, the issue of forgiving has not been raised seriously as yet.  
 
Forgiveness  is  crucial  to  the  cultural  trauma  theory  because  a  consistent  concept  of 
trauma,  as  a  living  metaphor,  refers  to  a  dynamic  process  which  includes  both  the  traumatic 
element  itself  and  the  process  of  its  healing.  Forgiveness  is  part  of  the  healing  process,  an 
integral element of mourning. Certainly, to forgive is not to forget, nor is it denial or disavowal. 
Forgiveness  entails  transformation  of  negative  emotions  based  on  strong  will,  a  will  to  start 
anew, a gesture quite opposite to vengeance. Forgiveness is never predicted, as it comes out of 
free  will  and  frees  both  doer  and  sufferer  from  the  relentless  automatism  of  a  vicious  cycle 
(Arendt 1958: 236-241).  What is more, forgiveness can be offered unconditionally only by those 
(previous victims) who are able to punish perpetrators (Ricouer 2004: 470). But who exactly is 
the victim and who is the perpetrator in the Greek civil war? Who is supposed to forgive whom?  
 
This question was unthinkable ten years ago due to the unshaken hegemony of the left 
minded accounts of the civil war. Today, whoever utters this question has: (a) to steer clear from 
negationism and historical revisionism (which is not identical with revisionist historiography); 
(b) to deconstruct the commanded forgetting of the civil war and the mythology that surrounds 
the so called ‘national resistance’; (c) to promote a spirit of ‘difficult forgiveness’.  Certainly, it 
will be a long process which ultimately concerns the next generation, my generation, as the real 
participants in the civil war are passing away. Yet, it might be less painful and it may leave room 
for a mutual request for and offering of forgiveness.         

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

123

 
Aguilar, P. (1996). Memoria y olvido de la Guerra Civil espanola. Madrid: Alianza Editorial. 
 
Alapuro, R. (2002). “Coping with the Civil War of 1918 in Twenty-first Century Finland”. In 
Kenneth  Christie  &  Robert  Cribb  (eds.)  Historical  Injustice  and  Democratic  Transition  in 
Eastern  Asia  and  Northern  Europe:  Ghosts  at  the  Table  of  Democracy.  London:  Curzon,  pp. 
169-183. 
 
Alexander,  J.  (2003).  The  Meanings  of  Social  Life.  A  Cultural  Sociology,  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press. 

 

Alexander,  J.  (2004).  ‘Toward  a  Theory  of  Cultural  Trauma’  in  In  Jeffrey  Alexander,  Ron 
Eyerman,  Bernhard  Giesen,  Neil  J.  Smelser,  and  Piotr  Sztompka  (eds.).  Cultural  Trauma  and 
Collective Identity, 1–30. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 
Antoniou, G. and Marantzidis, N. (2008). « The insisting past”. In Antoniou, G. – Marantzidis, 
N. (eds.). The Era of Confusion. The 40s and Historiography. Athens: Estia, pp. 11-52. 
    
Arendt, H. (1958). The Human Condition. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
 
Charalambis,  D.  (1989).  Clientelism  and  Populism.  The  Extra-institutional  Consensus  in  the 
Greek Political System. Athens: Exandas Publications. 
 
Charalambis,  D.  and    Demertzis,  N.  (1993).  Politics  and  Citizenship  in  Greece:  Cultural  and 
Structural Facets. Journal of Modern Greek Studies vol.11(2), 219-40. 
 
Clogg, R. (1979), A Short History of Modern Greece, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P. 
 
Connerton, P. (1989). How Societies Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

 

Coufoudakis, V. (1981). “The Greek Civil War and the United Nations”. In John Iatrides (ed.) 
Greece in the 1940s. A Nation in Crisis. University Press of New England, Hanover and London. 
 
Demertzis, N. (1996). The Nationalist Discourse. Ambivalent semantic field and contemporary 
tendencies. Athens: Ant. N. Sakkoulas Publishers. 
 
Demertzis, N. (1997). „Greece“. In R. Eatwell (ed.), European Political Culture (pp. 107- 121). 
London: Routledge. 
 

Demertzis,  N.  (2006).  «Emotions  and  Populism”.  In    S.  Clarke,  P.  Hoggett    &  S.  Thompson 
(eds.) Power, Passion and Politics . London:  Palgrave, pp. 103-122. 

 

124

 
Demertzis, N. (2009). „Mediatising Traumas in the Risk Society. A Sociology of Emotions 
Approach”. In Hopkins, Debra, Jochen Kleres, Helena Flam, and Helmut Kuzmics (eds.). 
Theorizing Emotions: Sociological Explorations and Applications.  
Frankfurt am Main, New York: Campus (in print), pp. 115-140. 
 
Dordanas, S. & Michaelidis, I. (2007). “Critical Literature Review for the Civil War (1990-
2006)”. In Ioannis Mourelos & Iakovos Michaelidis (eds.). The Greek Civil War. An Assessment. 
Political, ideological, historiographical repercussions. Athens: Ellinika Grammata, pp. 183-194. 
    
Elephantis, A. (2003). They’ve Got Our Athens. Re-reading History 1941-50. Athens: 
Vivliorama.  
 
Fearon, J and Laitin, D.D. (2003). “Ethnicity, Insurgency,and Civil War”. In American Political 
Science Review 97(1): 75-90. 
 
Fleischer, H. (1986). Im Kreuzschatten der Maechte: Griechenland 1941-1944. (Okkupation – 
Kollaboration- Resistance), Frankfurt/Bern/New York. 
 
Fleischer, H. (2008). Wars of Memory. World War II in Public History. Athens: Nefeli  
Publications.  
 
Haidia, E. (2000). ‘The Punishment of Collaborators in Northern Greece, 1945-1946’. In Mark 
Mazower (ed.). After the War was Over. Reconstructing the Family, Nation, and State in Greece, 
1943-1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 42-61. 
 
Halbwachs, M. (1992). On Collective Memory. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago 
Press. 
 
Holmes, M. (2008). “The Emotionalization of Reflexivity”. In Sociology vol. 43. 
 
Iatrides, J. (2002). “The international context of the Greek civil war”. In E. Nikolakopoulos, A. 
Rigos, G. Psallidas (eds.). The Civil War. From Varkiza to Grammos. February 1945 – August 
1949. Themelio. Athens, pp. 31-50. 
 
Kalyvas, S. (2000). “Red Terror: Leftist Violence during the Occupation”. In Mark Mazower 
(ed.). After the War was Over. Reconstructing the Family, Nation, and State in Greece, 1943-
1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 142-183. 
 
Kalyvas, S. (2002). “Forms, Dimensions and Practices of Violence in Civil War (1943-1949): 
An initial approach”. In E. Nikolakopoulos, A. Rigos, G. Psallidas (eds.). The Civil War. From 
Varkiza to Grammos. February 1945 – August 1949. Themelio. Athens, pp. 188-207. 
 
Kalyvas, S. (2003). “The Civil War (1943-1949): The End of Myths and the Turn Toward the 
Mass Level”. In Science and Society, n. 11, pp. 37-70 (in Greek). 
 

 

125

Kohn, H. (1961). The Idea of Nationalism. A Study in its Origins and Background. New York: 
The MacMillan Company (2nd edition). 
 
Kolko, G. (1994). Century of War. Politics, Conflict, and Society Since 1914. The New Press, 
New York. 
 
Kotarides, N. – Sideris, N. (2002). ‘Civil War: Ideological and Political Stakes”. In E. 
Nikolakopoulos, A. Rigos, G. Psallidas (eds.). The Civil War. From Varkiza to Grammos. 
February 1945 – August 1949. Themelio. Athens, pp. 115-124. 
 
Koulouris, N. (2000). A Greek Bibliography of the Civil War, 1945-1949. Athens: Filistor.  
 
Lyrintzis,  Ch.,  (1984).  “Political  Parties  in  Post-Junta  Greece:  A  case  of  ‘bureaucratic 
clientelism?’ in Pridham, G. (ed.). The New Mediterranean Democracies. Regime transition in 
Spain, Greece and Portugal. London: Frank Cass, pp. 99-118. 
 
Mann, M. (1992). “The Emergence of Modern European Nationalism”. In John Hall (ed.). 
Transition to Modernity.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 137-165.  
 
Marantzides, N. (2002). “Ethnic Dimensions of the Civil War”. In E. Nikolakopoulos, A. Rigos, 
G. Psallidas (eds.). The Civil War. From Varkiza to Grammos. February 1945 – August 1949. 
Themelio. Athens, pp. 208-221. 
 
Marantzides,  N.  &  Antoniou,  G.  (2003).  The  Greek  Civil  War  Historiography  (1945-2001): 
Journal  of  Historiography,  2003:  1 
Towards 
(http://www.columbia.edu/cu/history/gha/cjh/2003_4.htm) 
 
 
Marantzides, N. & Antoniou, G. (2004). “The Axis Occupation and Civil War: Changing Trends 
in Greek Historiography, 1941-2002”. In Journal of Peace Research. 41(2): 223-231. 
 
Margarides, G. (1989). ‘Internecine conflicts in Occupation (1941-1944): Analogies and 
differences’. In H. Fleischer and N. Svoronos (eds.). Greece 1936-1944. Dictatorship, 
Occupation, Resistance. Athens: Cultural Institute of the Agricultural bank of Greece, pp. 505-
515. 
 
Mazower, M. (2000). “Three Forms of Political Justice: Greece, 1944-1945”. In Mark Mazower 
(ed.). After the War was Over. Reconstructing the family, nation, and state in Greece, 1943-
1960. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, pp. 24-41.  
 
Mouzelis, N. (1986). Politics in the Semi-Periphery. Early Parliamentarism and Late 
Industrialism in the Balkans and Latin America. London: MacMillan. 
 
Mylonas, H. (2003). “The Comparative Method and the Study of Civil Wars”. In Science and 
Society, n. 11, pp. 1-35 (in Greek). 
 

a  new  paradigm. 

In  Columbia 

 

126

Panagiotopoulos, P. (1997).”The representation of suffering in the narration of two extreme 
experiences: Giorgis Pikros, Makronissos Chronicle, Primo Levi, Si c’est un home”. In Dokimes, 
2: 13-32. 
 
Panagiotopoulos, P. (1997). ‘The communist memory of the defeat: analyzing the sociological 
premises of meta-historical justification’. In Dokimes, 6: 135-163.  
 
 
Papandreou, A. (1969). Democracy at gunpoint: the Greek front, New York:  Doubleday 
 
Richter, H. (1997). H επέμβαση των Άγγλων στην Ελλάδα. Από την  Βάρκιζα στον εμφύλιο 
πόλεμο. Φεβρουάριος 1945- Αύγουστος 1946, Αθήνα: Εστία. 
 
Ricoeur, P. (2004).  Memory, History, Forgetting. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 
Riggs, F. (1964). Administration in Developing Countries: The Theory of Prismatic Society. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 
 
Sambanis, N. (2002). “A Review od Recent Advances and Future Directions in the Literature on 
Civil War’. In Defense and peace Economics 13(2): 215-243. 
 
Sakkas, J. (2000). “The Civil War in Evritania”. In Mark Mazower (ed.). After the War was 
Over. Reconstructing the Family, Nation, and State in Greece, 1943-1960. Princeton University 
Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 184-209. 
 
Scheler, M., (1961). Ressentiment. Glencoe: Free Press 
 
 
Sfikas, Th. (2002).”The ‘peace-war’ dimension of the Greek Civil War: Peace Initiatives and 
Possibilities of Compromise. 1945-1949”. In E. Nikolakopoulos, A. Rigos, G. Psallidas (eds.). 
The Civil War. From Varkiza to Grammos. February 1945 – August 1949. Themelio. Athens, pp. 
75-101. 
 
Sugar, P. F. (1969). “External and Domestic Roots of Eastern European Nationalism”. In Peter 
Sugar and Ivo Lederer (eds.).Nationalism in Eastern Europe. Washington: University of 
Washington Press, pp. 3-54.  
 
Tsoukalas, k, (1969), The Greek Tragedy, London: Hamondsworth, Penguin 
 
Voglis, P. (2000). “Between Negation and Self-Negation: Political Prisoners in Greece, 1945-
1950”. In Mark Mazower (ed.). After the War was Over. Reconstructing the Family, Nation, and 
State in Greece, 1943-1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 73-90. 
 
Voglis, P. (2002). Becoming a Subject. Political Prisoners during the Greek Civil War. European 
University Institute: Florence.  
 

 

127

Voglis, P. (2008). ‘Memories of the 1940s as a topic of historical analysis: methodological 
proposals’. In Ρ.-Β.  Μπούσχοτεν, Τ. Βερβενιώτη, Ε. Βουτυρά, Β. Δαλκαβούκης, Κ. Μπάδα 
(επ.), Μνήμες και Λήθη του Ελληνικού Εμφυλίου Πολέμου. Επίκεντρο: Θεσσαλονίκη, 2008, pp. 
61-80.  
 
Volkan, V. (2005). ‘Large-Group Identity and Chosen Trauma”. In Psychoanalysis Downunder, 
Issue #6  (on-line Journal).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

128

Rui Gao 
Yale University 
Draft for Paper to be Presented at the ‘Trauma Workshop’ 
May 13, 2009 
 

Revolutionary Trauma and Representation of the War: the Case of China in Mao’s Era 

 
For millions of Chinese who had the misfortune to live during the span of the War of 
Resistance Against Japan (1937-1945), their personal experience must have been unbearably 
traumatic and painful. During the 8 years of the war, China lost three million lives in combat, 
and the civilian casualties is estimated to be about twenty million117. And the heinous nature of 
the war atrocity committed by the invading army must have left indelible marks on memories 
and consciousness of millions of war victims, of which the Nanking Massacre and the crimes of 
No. 731 Special Forces are but two particularly atrocious cases. Such massively shared suffering 
and injustice, however, as vivid as it must have been in each war victims’ minds, remained 
ultimately private and individual: for many years after the building of the new state, it seldom if 
ever, found its way into the public sphere of expression.  

Why is this the case? One of the goals of this chapter is to delve into this curious 

phenomenon and to seek explanations from a cultural sociological point of view. As scholars of 
cultural trauma powerfully demonstrated, even widely shared suffering and injustice of 
enormous scale are not collectively traumatic in themselves, I argue that the horrendous misery 
and mass destruction brought by the war was never able to be translated into a cultural trauma 
for the collectivity; not only has there not been a successful trauma process occurring, the 
significance of the war was largely diminished by the triumph of other cultural traumas that had 
been powerfully constructed.  

My tasks in this chapter are therefore twofold. First, I attempt to reconstruct a grand 

narrative constructed in Mao’s era that tells the people about the modern history of China which 
eventually leads to the building of the new state. I argue that the new national collectivity was 
built through the successful construction of a cultural trauma, a trauma of the old society when 
all the evil forces joined together to inflict injury and unbearable pain upon Chinese people. At 
the core of this ‘grand’ collective trauma, there was the more intensified and heightened trauma-
drama of class struggle, where the evil perpetrators in the old society were ‘condensed’ and 
‘epitomized’ into an absolute evil of class enemy and the unspeakable pain and suffering of the 
proletarian victims were recreated and relived by a broad sphere of people, who were solidly 
united into a new class collectivity via a strong symbolic and emotional identification with the 
victims.  

My second task is to examine how the experience of the War of Resistance Against Japan 
fits into this grand narrative. Tracing the representation of the war in the public sphere of Mao’s 
China and analyzing its relation with the grand narrative, I argue that the depiction and 
interpretation of the war is to certain extent determined by the intrinsic logic and strength of the 
                                                 
117 There perhaps has never been an accurate statistic of the loss of lives and numbers of casualties caused by the 
War of Resistance against Japan in Chinese society since the end of the War. There seems to be several official 
versions of estimation on both sides of the Taiwan strait, by the Nationalist government and the PRC government 
respectively; but none could claim to be THE most precise estimation. In general, the most widely spread version in 
PRC is that the cost of lives amounted at least up to twenty millions. The number I quoted came from estimation 
from the Nationalist government in Taiwan, as made clear in an article written by Chiang Kai-shek’s son in 
memorization of the ex-president who led the war of resistance.  

 

129

