Concentrating on Susan Sontag’s production of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo in 1993 

and Paul Chan’s production in New Orleans in 2007, I argue that the productions in these 

locations are social performances as well as theatrical performances which express, 

communicate, and narrate trauma.  The play, written after and out of Beckett’s experience of 

war, expresses the mood of collective trauma.  However, even in contexts of collective trauma, 

the metaphor of waiting does not speak for itself.  Directors, producers, actors, journalists, and 

critics insert references to the meanings of the trauma into the play.  The central proposal of 

cultural trauma theory is that trauma does not simply happen but must be created through 

meaning work of construction and narration.  Social actors make claims about their trauma—the 

nature of suffering, who are victims, and who the perpetrators—through these productions of 

Waiting for Godot.  The productions communicate the claims to trauma to the audience that is 

physically present at the performances as well as to a wider audience who read and hear 

journalists’ accounts of them.  As social performance, rather than political speech, the claims 

which are made about the trauma are not posed as claims to truth in a Habermasian sense but as 

claims to expressive aptness (Rauer 2006: 259).  This case study of productions of Waiting for 

Godot illuminates that carrier groups and social actors make different kinds of claims in the 

trauma process: some claims to trauma appeal to factual truth while others appeal to expressive 

aptness.  Quite simply, this study illustrates that there are different ways to construct and narrate 

trauma.  We must understand the different types of claims to trauma and their different measures 

of success in order to evaluate how and why trauma processes begin or fail, continue or stall.      

 
Personal, Historic, and Artistic Context of Waiting for Godot 
“War is latent in much of Beckett’s work” (Gontarski cited in Bradby 2001: 13).       
 

 

65

Samuel Beckett wrote Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two Acts in a flourish of 

literary productivity in 1948/9.  Beckett spent most of the 1930s traveling and living in Britain, 

Ireland, Germany, and France. By the time World War II reached France he was living in Paris 

where he established himself within Surrealist and avant-garde literary and artistic circles and 

started writing in French.  Distraught by the German occupation of France, Beckett and many of 

his friends joined The Resistance (Bair 1978: 309&319).  After participating in The Resistance 

for a year, his network was betrayed to the Nazis, and Beckett and his partner Suzanne 

Deschevaux-Dumesnil went underground for their safety (Bradby 2001: 12).  In October 1942, 

after two months of hiding in Paris, Beckett and Suzanne procured false papers to move to the 

unoccupied zone.  The couple proceeded by foot from Paris to Roussillon in Provence, where 

they stayed for two and a half years (Bair 1978: 318&319).   

The unique aesthetics of the Provence countryside and Beckett’s experiences in 

Roussillon figure significantly, though rather subtly, in Waiting for Godot.  In Roussillon, war 

was omnipresent; it was the reason Beckett was compelled to stay in the Provencal village, and it 

shaped nearly all the conditions of life.  Beckett and his neighbors and friends in Roussillon 

listened to radio reports of the war, and he participated in late-night resistance missions (Bair 

1978).  Several literary scholars argue that Beckett’s post-war writings reflect his real, rather 

than purely intellectual, experience of war and “all the anguish of waiting for contacts in 

dangerous circumstances, of seeing friends betrayed, hearing of their torture and death…” 

(Bradby 2001: 13).  Beckett habitually took long walks while biding his time in Roussillon (Bair 

1978: 325).  The opening stage directions of Beckett’s play announce the setting: “A country 

road.  A tree.  Evening” (Beckett [1954] 1982: 1).  Beckett’s travelers wait, uncertain of their 

fate, along a road like the ones between Paris to Roussillon or like the country roads where 

 

66

Beckett passed the time waiting for the war to end.  In addition, Beckett made several direct 

references to Roussillon in Godot, including the unique red color of the dirt, and he named a 

character, “Bonnelly,” after a local farmer (Bradby 2001: 12&13).  As I will discuss later, Godot 

does not explicitly refer to war.  However, the fear, anxiety, uncertainty and waiting the play 

conveys are unmistakably born of his experiences during the war in Roussillon.  Before I 

examine productions of Godot which make claims to trauma, let us look closely at Beckett’s play 

in order to understand the literary script employed in the social performance of trauma.                                     

 
Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two Acts 
 

Simply stated, Waiting for Godot revolutionized theater.  Several decades after directing 

the Actors Workshop production of Waiting for Godot in San Francisco, Herbert Blau stated, “I 

think the hardest thing to reconstruct, now that Beckett has been deified among American theater 

people, particularly academics, is just how startling those plays were” (Blau cited in Bradby 

2001: 97).  Perhaps the most novel element of Waiting for Godot is that it lacks a true plot.  As 

the title indicates, Godot is a play in two acts, yet the structure of the second repeats the first.  

Instead of development, the structure of Waiting for Godot is “cyclical and static” (Bradby 2001: 

36).  In the first act, Estragon and Vladimir meet on a road and commence waiting for Godot to 

arrive.  The setting is simple; as mentioned previously, the stage directions indicate only “A 

country road.  A tree.  Evening.”  Like clowns and music-hall performers, Vladimir and Estragon 

banter in the form of a “cross-talk act” which features interruptions, unfinished stories, double 

meanings, and misunderstandings (Bradby 2001: 43).  Eventually Lucky, burdened by packages 

and with a rope around his neck, and Pozzo, holding a whip, enter the stage.  Pozzo bosses 

Lucky with commands such as “Up pig!” (Beckett [1954] 1982: 20).  These two couples are the 

main figures in the play, but they are not typical dramatic characters.  They lack reliable personal 

 

67

histories and evidence of internal life.  Bradby argues that “it is best to approach each of the pairs 

of characters as two halves of a single theatrical dynamic” (2001: 29).  Pozzo and Lucky depict 

an interdependent master-slave relationship while Vladimir and Estragon are cross-talk 

performers whose symbiotic relationship takes on many shades depending on the performance, 

including friends, an old married couple, or two comedians (Bradby 2001: 30).  Toward the end 

of Act I, a boy comes to announce that Mr. Godot will not “come this evening but surely to-

morrow” (Beckett [1954] 1982: 55).  In Act II, the set and the actors appear physically 

diminished; Pozzo is now blind.  As the play ends, Vladimir and Estragon discuss committing 

suicide but decide to wait to see if Godot will come tomorrow.  In their last exchange, they 

decide to go, yet the stage direction reads, “They do not move” (Beckett [1954] 1982: 109). 

Typically in drama and literature, meaning is delivered via standard elements such as the 

progression of the plot, the topic of the play, and character development.  Actions happen in 

sequence, building toward an end and a resolution from which meaning or a lesson may be 

gleaned.  Static instead of progressing, Godot does not allow for meaning to be “read off” the 

plot (Bradby 2001: 24).  Godot also evades a structure of being directly “about” something; the 

play lacks a referent.  It has no inherent setting, time period, or message.  Ibsen’s A Doll’s House 

is about marriage in the 19th century. Waiting for Godot resists that sort of telling.  Characters 

wait on a road, but the object of their desire never arrives.  Further, it is not clear who or what 

“Godot” is.  Throughout his life, Beckett insisted that “Godot” was not a stand-in for God and if 

he “knew who Godot was” he would have said so in the play (Bair 1978: 382; Schneider 1967: 

55).  Although the figure of Godot is the focus of many audience members and critics, Martin 

Esslin argues that waiting, rather than Godot, is the subject of the play ([1961] 1980: 50).  

However, it is not only about waiting in a standard sense.  Beckett’s Godot depicts on stage the 

 

68

existential experience of waiting.  One place to find a meaning offered by Godot is its 

presentation of the human—painfully, comically human—experience of time.  

The last pairing of utterance and stage direction in the play, when the travelers decide to 

go yet do not move, is an example of Beckett’s treatment of the themes of movement and stasis 

in such a way as to unsettle meaning.  Dialogue and action work at cross-purposes, creating an 

effect nearly impossible to produce with prose.  This double gesture—at once toward movement 

and toward stasis—is one last destabilizing move in Godot; the end of the play, and thus the 

“meaning” in a standard sense, is left open.  Or, perhaps, it indicates that the meaning cannot be 

fixed or resolved.  Beckett himself inveterately declined to illuminate the “meanings” and 

symbolism of his plays.  The director of the first American production who developed a personal 

relationship with the playwright explains that Beckett preferred to “let the supposed ‘meanings’ 

fall where they may….” (Schneider 1967: 55).  As I will discuss in detail, the meanings of 

Waiting for Godot do not only passively “fall” where they may; social actors and the audience 

actively write meanings of their trauma into Beckett’s play.       

       
“The play struck such different chords in its various audiences…” (Bradby 2001: 2)  
 
 

Roger Blin directed the first performance of Waiting for Godot at the Théâtre de 

Babylone in Paris in 1953.  Beginning with that inaugural performance, critics, journalists and 

academics have expressed considerable interest and anxiety over whether performances of the 

Godot would be “understood” and received favorably by audiences and critics.  In fact, before 

Blin agreed to stage Waiting for Godot at the Babylone, the play was rejected by several 

producers in Paris who cited concern that it was “incomprehensible, boring, too highbrow, or too 

deep” (Bair 1978: 397).  Despite the concerns, the first production in Paris proved extremely 

 

69

successful, running for four hundred performances at the Babylone before transferring to another 

theater in Paris (Esslin [1961] 1980: 39).   

Over the course of several decades, concerns that the avant-garde qualities of the play 

would prevent positive audience reception of the play largely fell off.  Despite fears—which 

proved to be well-founded in some cases—that early audiences would not understand or connect 

with the play, Waiting for Godot has been staged extensively throughout the world.68  Its success 

helped propel Beckett to his position as one of the most prominent literary figures of the 

twentieth century, and, in turn, his literary fame conferred legitimacy on the play.  The 

revolutionary, avant-garde play is now a classic drama.  Although the initial anxieties that 

audiences would not understand or respond positively to the play subsided as it achieved the 

status of classic, those concerns were replaced by others.  Critics and academics now express 

concern that Waiting for Godot has lost its “provocative quality” and has become a “safe bet” to 

stage (Bradby 2001: 162).  However, critics, journalists, and academics have long identified 

performances where their anxieties about reception are much less—or even ceased to be—of 

concern for reasons external to the logic of the theater.  When Godot was feared to be too dark or 

too high-brow, audiences understood it.  And when critics and academics feared Godot is merely 

a mundane classic emptied of its theatrical surprises, audiences felt a vibrant connection to the 

                                                 
68 The first production in the United States was, in the words of the director, a “spectacular flop” (Schneider 1967: 
56).  Staged in Miami, the producers advertised Waiting for Godot as the “the laugh sensation of two continents” 
starring the well-known comic actors Bert Lehr and Tom Ewell (Bradby 2001: 93).  Bradby assesses that Lehr and 
Ewell and the director doomed the production by playing up the comedic aspects of the play and making the tragic 
elements palatable.  Schneider, the director, attributes the production’s failure to the audience’s expectation of 
attending a light comedy (Schneider 1967: 56).  Due to the “disastrous” run in Miami, Godot’s first opening New 
York City was canceled (Bradby 2001: 93).  After reorganizing the production and replacing the director and some 
of the actors, Godot opened on Broadway in April 1956 (Bradby 2001: 93).  The production in Miami is the first of 
several examples of Waiting for Godot failing to some degree when it was used primarily as a star vehicle or to earn 
large profits for the theater and production company.  A critic for The New York Times reports that the Broadway 
production featuring Robin Williams and Steve Martin as Vladimir and Estragon in 1988 “rode into town on tidal 
waves of hype” (Rich 1988).  However, the show proved “utterly impersonal” and turned Godot into “the stage 
equivalent of a buddy film” (Rich 1988).  Instances of failed or less successful Godot productions underscore the 
interest of productions that succeed. 

 

70

play.  In the beginning of Beckett: Waiting for Godot, Bradby attributes the varied receptions of 

the play to variations in the logic of the theater: “It was understood (and misunderstood) 

differently in the different theatrical cultures (2001: 2).”  Yet, later in the book, he joins other 

critics and academics in acknowledging that the unique history of performances and audience 

reception of Waiting for Godot goes beyond the logic of the theater.  In “situations of political 

oppression” the canonical drama has “special relevance” and becomes provocative once again 

(2001: 162).    

 

  Susan Sontag’s production of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo during the siege in the 

summer of 1993 is one of the productions in “situations of political oppression” cited by Bradby.  

In “Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo,” Sontag articulates that the relevance and resonance of 

Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo was obvious.  During her first visit to Sarajevo the preceding 

spring, Sontag spoke with a director and producer about coming back to the city to direct a play.  

When he asked which play she would direct, Sontag recalls: 

 

And bravado, following the impulsiveness of my proposal, 
suggested to me in an instant what I might not have seen had I 
taken longer to reflect: there was one obvious play for me to direct.  
Beckett’s play, written over forty years ago, seems written for, and 
about Sarajevo. (1994: 88) 

 
 
Why did Sontag, a social critic and literary figure with countless dramas to choose from, realize 

“in an instant” that Waiting for Godot was written for and about the situation in Sarajevo?  How 

is it that Godot, a play which cannot properly be said to be “about” anything, could be about the 

violence and suffering in that city?   

In Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo: Theological Reflections on Nihilism, Tragedy, and 

Apocalypse, David Toole (1998) weaves together philosophy, theology, sociology, and 

 

71

contemporary politics to explain that Sontag and her audience in Sarajevo turned to Waiting for 

Godot as a way to reflect on the atrocities of the twentieth century.  Violence in Sarajevo book-

ended the century: the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand began World War I and the citizens 

of Sarajevo suffered a violent siege, during which thousands died and many more suffered from 

malnutrition and gripping fear, at the dusk of the bloody century (Toole 1998: xiii).  Toole 

reflects:      

 

I can imagine that to witness a performance of Godot in Sarajevo 
in 1993 would have been to meet head-on the question of what 
such a century might mean—or rather, the question of whether 
meaning itself could possibly survive a century such as this. 
(Author’s emphasis 1998: 19) 
 

 
In Sarajevo in 1993, Waiting for Godot was not merely a classic of the theater; here the play 

seemed ultimately relevant to the situation.  Bradby identified the resonance and labeled it 

“political oppression.”  Recognizing the same resonance, Toole attributed the “remarkable 

convergence of text and world” to understanding atrocity in the twentieth century (Toole 1998: 

4).  

In certain contexts—variously labeled political oppression or atrocity—concerns that 

critics, academics and journalists normally have about Godot lose their importance.  Instead of 

worrying whether Godot will be understood, critics and journalists reports it has “struck an 

instant chord” with the audience (Bradby 2001: 102).  Instead of worrying about whether it has 

been performed too much, it seems instantly obvious to stage it and no other play (Sontag 1994: 

88).  These critics identify what, in the theory of social performance and cultural pragmatics, is 

conceptualized as “re-fusion” (Alexander, Giesen and Mast 2006).  In complex, mass mediated 

society, social life has been “de-fused” (Alexander 2006: 29).  Rituals, which rely on shared 

 

72

meanings and cultural understandings, are rare.  However, social actors in our complex social 

world continue to communicate the meanings of their social experiences through social 

performance.  Cultural pragmatics takes as its goal to demonstrate “how social performance, 

whether individual or collective, can be analogized systemically to theatrical ones” (Alexander 

2006: 29).  I argue that the theatrical performance of Waiting for Godot is a social performance 

in contexts of trauma.  In contexts of trauma, audiences seem to understand Godot and its deeply 

provocative qualities.  This “re-fusion” transcends the logic of the theater; audiences not only 

“enjoy” or “appreciate” the play, but it “speaks to” and “speaks for” their social situations.  In 

these contexts, Godot is not only a theatrical performance; it is a social performance.   

Instead of the numerous explanations for fusion in these contexts, I offer one: productions 

of Waiting for Godot have achieved fusion in contexts of trauma.  To label these circumstances 

of “trauma” is more than a parsimonious solution for understanding the circumstances in which 

Waiting for Godot is something other—something more—than an avant-garde play or a classic 

drama.  A close study of the productions of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo and New Orleans will 

contribute to our understandings of social trauma theories.  First examining these productions 

will help to clarify the relationship between collective trauma, a concept describing communities 

affected by disasters, and cultural trauma which argues that trauma is not born but made.  On the 

theoretical level, I will argue that collective trauma theorizes important elements of mood and 

emotion, but we must remain theoretically vigilant that it is not events which are traumatic but it 

is our construction of occurrences as traumatic to cultural structures and expectations that make 

them so.  Further, looking at productions of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo and New Orleans will 

illustrate the ways in which claims to trauma through construction and narration may be made 

performatively rather than factually.  By staging Waiting for Godot, social actors define the 

 

73

trauma—what the trauma means to the community, who are the victims, and who are the 

perpetrators—using aesthetics and performative acts rather than evidence such as testimony, 

dates of events, numbers of the dead, and cost of destruction.        

 
Trauma Theory: Mood and Meaning  
 
 

Waiting for Godot has been staged in many contexts of trauma or potential trauma 

(Smelser 2004: 35&36); indeed, there have been too many to adequately address here.  Godot 

has been performed in prisons in the United States and Sweden, in Haifa with references to the 

plight of Palestinians in Israel, and South Africa during Apartheid by a mixed-race cast (Bradby 

2001).  The very first performance of Godot at the Théâtre de Babylone followed shortly after 

World War II and the Nazi occupation of France.  I will discuss at length two other performances 

in trauma contexts: in Sarajevo during the siege and in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina.  

 

Academic and clinical work on trauma began in the realm of psychiatry; Freud was the 

most famous early theorists of trauma (Smelser 2004: 32).  Sociologists have specified two more 

main types of trauma: collective (or social) trauma and cultural trauma.  Kai Erikson’s seminal 

study of Buffalo Creek, an Appalachian mining community almost entirely physically destroyed 

by a flood of mining sludge, defines and illustrates the central elements of collective trauma 

(1976).  Collective trauma holds as its main tenet that “one can speak of traumatized 

communities as something distinct from assemblies of traumatized persons” (Erikson 1995: 185).  

In his précis on cultural trauma, Jeffrey Alexander acknowledges Erikson’s important 

contribution of conceptualizing trauma as a collective as well as individual phenomenon, but he 

criticizes Erikson for holding a “naturalistic perspective” in which trauma is treated as a quality 

inherent in certain events due to their sudden, devastating, violent, or shocking nature (2004: 2-

4).  Later in his career, Erikson seems to argue for a less-naturalistic position for collective 

 

74

trauma.  In “Notes on Trauma and Community,” an essay reflecting on his decades of fieldwork 

and study of disasters and collective trauma, Erikson points out that his dictionary defines 

“trauma” as a “a stress or blow that may produce disordered feelings or behavior” and “the state 

or condition produced by such a stress or blow” (1995: 184).  Erikson encourages his readers to 

shift their emphasis to the latter definition “because it is how people react to them rather than 

what they are that give events whatever traumatic quality they can be said to have” (Author’s 

emphasis 1995: 184).  Cultural trauma goes further, arguing that trauma is produced when 

members of collectivities successfully construct and narrate an event or a series of events as 

significantly and indelibly undermining part or all of their culture and system of meanings 

(Alexander et al 2004: especially 10 & 38).  Groups make claims to injury and trauma in the 

“trauma process” of constructing and narrating trauma between the event and its representation 

(Alexander 2004: 11).  It is in this process of claims-making that the production of Waiting for 

Godot represents, speaks for, and specifies the trauma in Sarajevo and New Orleans.    

In addition to denying that traumas are born fully-formed and specified, we must also 

unsettle the idea of the “collective” in collective trauma.  Collective trauma signals that a group 

imagined to constitute a “collective” suffers a trauma together.  However, this “collective” may 

or may not have been experienced as a community or a collective before the traumatic 

occurrence.  The collective trauma, therefore, can form or refigure the collective—its 

membership, bonds, mutual responsibilities, and stance toward outsiders.  We should think of 

Erikson’s “traumatized communities” as a collective that has, in a Durkheimian sense, a reality 

and a set of logics external to individuals.  It is this Durkheimian collective which experiences 

social trauma.  Erikson argues that “trauma damages the texture of community” (1995:187) in 

 

75

two ways: by damaging social bonds and by creating a social climate of trauma.  Specifying the 

latter sense of damage to the community, Erikson (1995) writes: 

 

…traumatic experiences work their way so thoroughly into the 
grain of the affected community that they come to supply its 
prevailing mood and temper, dominate its imagery and its sense of 
self, govern the way its members relate to one another. (Emphasis 
added, p.190) 

 
 
Collective trauma is primarily a concept of emotion rather than, like cultural trauma, a concept of 

cognition and meaning construction.  Erikson argues against a common and rather 

sentimentalized vision that communities experiencing trauma enjoy a “wave of good feeling” 

when they realize that they and their community have survived the initial disaster (1995: 189).  

Erikson flatly states that he has never witnessed this sort of euphoria in any of his fieldwork nor 

read about it in the recent literature.  Instead, collective trauma is characterized by a loss of 

community bonds, lack of trust in the future and in ones neighbors, and a collective mood of fear 

and depression (Erikson 1976).  Although we must be clear in our understanding of the concept 

of collective trauma and the language we use to describe it, I contend that collective trauma 

remains an important sociological concept for understanding when and how communities and 

collectives experience events as traumatic.  Collective trauma may or may not become a cultural 

trauma at a national or international level in a “trauma process” of articulation, narration, 

construction, and counter-construction (Alexander et al 2004).    

Erikson’s study in Buffalo Creek also indicates that collective trauma is characterized by 

perseveration on the traumatic occurrence.  In Buffalo Creek, residents lived in constant, illogical 

fear of another flood.  Many residents reported difficulty sleeping and feeling agitated and 

apprehensive when it rained (Erikson 1976: 179).  The occurrence is over, but the emotions stay 

 

76

with the individuals and shape the collective mood.  In other words, collective trauma involves a 

particular experience of time.  Days and weeks go by, but the mood of collective trauma lingers.  

When performed in these situations, Waiting for Godot expresses waiting, uncertainty, anguish 

and fear that the people experiencing collective trauma feel acutely in their daily lives.  Like 

Vladimir and Estragon, individuals and collectives experiencing collective trauma do not know 

when their situation will end.  Nor, like Beckett’s hobos, do they know what that end will look 

like in terms of the bonds of community that have been forged, challenged, and upset during the 

occurrence and the collective trauma.   

Productions of Waiting for Godot become social performance through which the 

collective can represent and communicate its present state to itself.  In addition, the collective 

may realize itself as such through a social performance of a shared emotional state and mood.  

However, productions of Waiting for Godot do not become social performances expressing 

trauma on their own.  Claims to trauma do not speak for themselves.  There is a “need for 

walking and talking—and seeing and listening to the walking and talking” which theater and 

social performance, and theater as social performance, can provide (Alexander 2006: 33).  Social 

performances, like theater performances, require actors, audiences, scripts and settings.  Social 

actors perform and multiple audiences—the in-person audience, journalists, and media 

consumers—observe and interpret the social performance of trauma via Waiting for Godot.  It is 

to these performances that I now turn.   

 

Performing Trauma to Multiple Audiences 
 

Beckett intended Waiting for Godot to “avoid definition” (Bradby 2001: 17).  

Productions of Godot honoring Beckett’s intentions could express the “mood and temper” of 

collective trauma.  However, as we will see, productions of Waiting for Godot in contexts of 

 

77

collective trauma have gone beyond mood to articulate the meaning of the situation and the 

identity of “the players.”  In these performances, directors, actors, journalists, and attendees 

inject the famously “meaningless” avant-garde play with meanings relevant to their situation.  

The productions specify the victims, the perpetrators, and the meanings of the trauma itself.  The 

first production of Waiting for Godot provides a good example.  David Bradby (2001) reports 

that audiences in Paris were particularly horrified by the Pozzo-Lucky couple which was read as 

a Nazi-victim pair:   

 

No doubt a sense of horror was provoked as much by the attitude 
of Pozzo as by the appearance and behavior of Lucky.  Memories 
of the Nazi occupation were still fresh in people’s minds.  Indeed 
the full horror of the death camps had emerged only gradually in 
the postwar years.  The image of a poor, broken-down slave, 
suffering from a terminal medical condition but obliged to 
continue to perform whatever tasks he could still manage by an 
arrogant master, was not very far removed from realities which 
were only too vivid in the memories of many in the audience. (p. 
62)  
 

 
Bradby indicates that the director, Blin, encouraged the audience to read Pozzo as a Nazi by 

emphasizing the class differences between the two (Bradby 2001: 62).  Of course, the “full 

horror” of the death camps continued to be given meaning long after the performance of Godot 

in Paris.  An interesting question to pose—one which we probably cannot answer now—is how 

members of the Parisian audience understood the figure of Lucky in 1953.  If Pozzo represented 

a cruel and demanding Nazi, who did Lucky represent?  Was he a Jew, a prisoner of a 

Concentration Camp, or was he a Parisian during the Occupation?  We do know that Beckett’s 

potentially generic master-slave pair was rendered and read in Paris as a reference to the 

collective trauma of Parisians at the time.  And, further, the performance of Pozzo as a Nazi 

indicated the perpetrator of the trauma.  

 

78

Beckett was part of this “collective” in Paris after the war.  When he returned to Paris 

after years of interminable waiting, Beckett found his beloved city and his relationships with 

friends and colleagues irrevocably changed by the war (Bair 1978: 373).  As a text, Waiting for 

Godot was born out of Beckett’s personal trauma and the mood of collective trauma in Paris 

following the war.  However, as discussed previously, Beckett explicitly includes neither the war 

nor any other referent in his play.  In addition to lacking a referent, literary scholars have argued 

that Beckett revolutionized the narrative logic of drama.  As I discussed previously, Godot resists 

standard plot progression; the play presents an experience of waiting and time rather than being 

“about” anything.  Godot’s arrival, what is expected to “happen” in a standard sense, is denied to 

the characters and the audience.  However, from the first performance, audiences and directors 

undermined Beckett’s intentions to stage a “meaningless” play defying definitions and 

interpretation.  Against the grain of Beckett’s narrative logic, audiences and producers insert 

meanings into the play by specifying victims, perpetrators, and the nature of their trauma.  

The central contribution of cultural trauma is the insistence that occurrences are not 

automatically traumatic; events must become traumatic.  Groups must construct and narrate 

events and their aftermath as threatening or damaging to the meaning structures which underpin, 

and indeed constitute, the collective.  Individuals and groups construct and contest the meaning 

of events in institutions such as courts, parliaments and the media (Alexander 2004: 15-20).  The 

media play a crucial role as journalists and intellectuals report and interpret the construction and 

contestation of trauma narratives in other institutional realms.  In addition to reporting strict 

“facts” such as numbers of the dead, the cost of destruction, and the transcripts of judicial and 

legislative hearings, journalists and writers may “expressively dramatize” traumas in the mass 

media (Alexander 2004: 18).   

 

79

The capacity of the media to convey, interpret, and judge constructions and narrations of 

trauma is critical in the social performance of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo and New Orleans.  

The media constitutes an audience to the social performance along with the audience which was 

physically present at the performances of the play in those cities.  Valentin Rauer argues that the 

presence of multiple layers of audience is an essential feature of social performance (2006: 260).  

Social performances require actors to creatively perform and audiences to interpret the 

performance.  Further, the audience does not consist only in Goffman’s dichotomous front stage 

and back stage (2006: 259).  In societies with mass media, there are layers of audiences who 

witness, describe, interpret, and judge social performances: there is an in-person audience, the 

media audience that encodes the performance, and the media consumers who hear or read about 

their reports (Rauer 2006: 260).   

Rauer identifies these three layers of audience in his case study of the performative act of 

German Chancellor Willy Brandt’s kniefall at the monument to those who suffered and died in 

the Warsaw Ghetto (2006).  Rauer disaggregates the audience of social performance analytically 

to understand the different ways audiences contribute to the social performance or diffuse it 

through their actions and interpretations.  In other words, social performance requires fusion with 

all layers of audience to become a salient performance.  However, Rauer does not discuss the 

ability of social actors to shape how the audience, including the journalistic audience, receives 

and perceives the social performance.  Using Rauer’s three layers of audience is useful for 

analyzing the interpretations of meaning by the various audiences for the productions of Waiting 

for Godot.  Further, I will show that analytically disaggregating the layers of audience 

illuminates different performative strategies of the social actors who produced and directed 

Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo and New Orleans. 

 

80

The first-order audience consists of the spectators who are present for the performance 

(Rauer 260).  Social performances always entail action rather than description, and an audience, 

usually one that is physically present, must witness the act (Rauer 2006: 259).  The in-person 

audience reacts in real time to an action happening in their physical space.  Journalists and 

critics, the second-order audience, must report and interpret an occurrence for it to achieve social 

and cultural importance, for an occurrence to become a salient social event (Mast 2006: 118).  

There is often overlap in the layers of audience (Rauer 2006: 260); indeed, some of the 

journalists who reported on the productions of Waiting for Godot in New Orleans and in 

Sarajevo physically attended a performance.  Journalists report on the performative act, 

recounting what happened and by whom.  Journalists and critics also encode the meaning of the 

event, interpreting the actions and declaring their consequence.  Journalists and critics pronounce 

a performance a “success” or a “failure.”  A social performance is a “success” on a theoretical 

level when the audience, the mise-en-scene, script, and the actors achieve “re-fusion” (Alexander 

2006)  To achieve re-fusion, a social performance must be perceived as spontaneous rather than 

calculated, authentic not manufactured (Rauer 2006: 275).  Journalists and critics indicate the 

success or failure of a performance using these criteria, and by citing and interpreting the 

reactions of the in-person audience.  When the reactions—laughter, gasps, comments, silence, 

and tears—of the first-order audience are encoded and conveyed by journalists, those who are 

present are simultaneously audience and actors in the social performance (Rauer 2006: 260).    

Journalists and critics encode the meanings of the performance for the third-order 

audience, media consumers.  The third-order audience reads reports in newspapers and blogs, 

hears about the performance on the radio, and sees visual representations of it on television and 

the internet.  An occurrence becomes an event, and action becomes social performance, in part 

 

81

through the sheer dissemination to a wide third-order audience.  The third-order audience “more 

or less depend” upon the interpretations of the journalists and critics and their assessment of 

performative success or failure (Rauer 2006: 260).  However, the third-order audience is not 

populated by passive consumers; they will also interpret the meaning of the performance and 

form their own opinions of its authenticity and consequence.  Nevertheless, their reactions are 

notoriously difficult for social analysts to capture.  It is the meanings as they are actively 

received by the third-order audience that they will mobilize in future decisions and actions such 

as in opinion polls and political action.       

In Sarajevo during the siege and in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina social actors—

directors, producers, and stage actors—appealed to all three layers of audience in their social 

performance of trauma through the theatrical production of Beckett’s Waiting for Godot.  In 

these locations, the play expresses the mood of collective trauma in Erickson’s sense.  However, 

the metaphor of waiting does not speak for itself.  The social actors make claims to trauma by 

inserting references to the nature of the trauma, the vicitims, and the perpetrators into Beckett’s 

referent-free avant-garde play.  These references specify and construct the trauma for the 

individuals who are living through the traumatic occurrence as well for the wider public from 

whom those claiming trauma seek recognition and solidarity.   

 
Sarajevo 
 
 

Susan Sontag, the American writer and public intellectual, traveled to Sarajevo in 1993 to 

direct Waiting for Godot as the city’s residents were being ravaged by indiscriminate violence, 

power outages, and widespread hunger.  Sontag’s production featured a local producer, Haris 

Pasovic, and local theater actors.  Sontag appealed to three layers of audience through her 

performative project: those who attended the performances in the Youth Theater in Sarajevo in 

 

82

August 1993, the journalists who wrote about the production, and the individuals who heard and 

read those accounts.  The production made claims to trauma through the production of the play 

that resonated and appealed to each level.  I will discuss how Sontag and the other social actors 

involved in the production appealed to each layer of audience and the ways in which the play 

achieved, or was said to achieve, re-fusion.  Of course there was overlap in strategies of 

appealing to and interpretation by the layers of audience: what the production of Waiting for 

Godot meant, or was said to mean, to the people of Sarajevo affects what it means, or what it is 

said to mean, to the audiences beyond the city. 

 

How was the production of Godot experienced and interpreted by the people in Sarajevo 

during the summer of 1993?  To analyze the first-order audience almost two decades after the 

performance without having been present at the performance, I must rely on the accounts of the 

social actor’s involved: principally what Sontag wrote about her production and on comments by 

residents of Sarajevo as they are quoted by journalists.  Artistic culture, European identity, and 

feeling abandoned by their fellow Europeans were very much related for residents of Sarajevo in 

the summer of 1993.  Sarajevo’s residents who had sustained a vibrant intellectual and cultural 

life based in European artistic traditions were now living without electricity or proper food and 

were in constant fear for their lives.  Many of them felt that their European neighbors allowed 

them to suffer by their reticence to intervene in the violence.  Under ongoing attack, residents 

bitterly recognized that cultural solidarity with Europe did not extend to political solidarity.  The 

intellectuals and artists with whom many residents of the city felt an affiliation largely 

abandoned the cause of the Sarajevans.  Boujan Zec, a Sarajevan journalist, was quoted in The 

Guardian: “Writers like Hemingway risked their lives for liberty in Spain. Now all that Europe 

 

83

can do is send us a few packets of aid.”69  By participating in the production of Godot, the actors, 

theater support staff, and first-order audience members reinforced for themselves their collective 

identity as civil, cultured Europeans worthy of being saved from “savage” violence.  The actor 

Velibor Topic, who played one of the Estragons, was also quoted in The Guardian: “There is not 

only fighting on the front line. We must tell the world that we are not animals. We are cultured, 

we have ideas and dreams.”70  The production of Waiting for Godot and the media attention it 

generated was a way to showcase that culture and civility persevered in Sarajevo.  As Velibor 

indicates, the production of Waiting for Godot, a well-known and respected play, articulated their 

collective identity as civilized Europeans to the residents of Sarajevo. The production was 

intended to articulate the same collective identity to audiences outside the city.   

 

The residents of Sarajevo were also widely quoted by journalists and by Sontag saying 

that Waiting for Godot made sense to perform in their historical moment because they, too, were 

waiting.  They were waiting for in intervention by the United States, President Clinton, the 

United Nations, and their European neighbors.  John Pomfret includes one of the actor’s 

reflections on the figure of Godot in his article for the Washington Post: “You never know when 

something is going to come crashing down and blow your head apart…  That's my own personal 

Godot.”71  Using the same sort of language as the academic David Bradby when he identified 

Godot’s “special relevance,” a British reporter writes, “The play's message has touched a chord 

among Sarajevans beyond the tiny theatre-going public. ‘I hear Ms Sontag is waiting for Godot - 

we are are waiting for the Europeans and the Americans,’ commented Jovan Divjak, a Bosnian 

                                                 
69 Narayan, Natasha. 1993. “A Candle in the Dark.” The Guardian, August 20, p. 2.  
70 Narayan. 1993. The Guardian, August 20. 
71 Pomfret, John. 1993. “‘Godot’ Amid the Gunfire; In Bosnia, Sontag’s Take on Beckett.”  The Washington Post, 
August 19, C1.   

 

84

army chief. ‘Did Godot ever show up?’”72  The residents waited for an uncertain end to the 

violence, and the production of Godot is a way to express their status to those for whom they 

wait. 

 

The journalists and critics, including Sontag herself, who wrote about the production of 

Godot in Sarajevo largely focused on the desperation in Sarajevo and how apt the metaphor of 

waiting was for the residents’ situation.  Soon after returning to the United States in the early fall 

of 1993, Sontag wrote two similar essays about her experience directing the play in the 

beleaguered city.  Published in the New York Review of Books and the Performing Arts Journal, 

Sontag targeted her reflections and interpretations of the performance to an elite, intellectual, and 

largely American audience.  In “Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo,” Sontag wrote that she traveled 

to Sarajevo to direct a production of Waiting for Godot in order to “pitch in and do something” 

(1994: 87).  Although Sontag insisted that she could not go to Sarajevo merely to act as a witness 

to the violence, she is that too.  In her essay, she provides details about life in the city that read 

like an ethnographic account.  Sontag describes the emotional tableau of collective trauma, 

stringing together observations that echo Erikson’s fieldwork in Buffalo Creek:   

 

…many Sarajevans are reluctant to leave their apartments except 
when it is absolutely necessary…though no one is safe anywhere, 
they have more fear when they are in the street.  And beyond fear, 
there is depression—most Sarajevans are very depressed—which 
produces lethargy, exhaustion, apathy. (1994:90) 
    
 

Further, Sontag reports that the residents are “waiting, hoping, not wanting to hope,” and they 

are “humiliated” (1994: 91).  The forces promoting what Erikson called the “prevailing mood 

and temper” of collective trauma were constant; the real danger had not subsided in Sarajevo.  

Snipers threatened to kill people on the street and in their homes.  Residents lacked electricity, 

                                                 
72 Tanner, Marcus. 1993. “A Long Wait for Godot.” The Independent, August 2, p. 1.   

 

85

and waited in lines to receive daily rations of food and water from the United Nations.  Sontag 

notes that her actors suffered from fatigue and malnutrition; a formerly overweight actress lost 

more than sixty pounds during the war.  The newspaper accounts of the situation in Sarajevo and 

of the plight of the individuals in the social and professional circle of the theater mention many 

of the same details that Sontag includes in her essays.     

 

The second-order audience, the journalists, established that Godot was, in fact, an apt 

metaphor in large part by describing the reactions of the actors and the audience in the theater.  

Many journalists describe what happened and interpret the mood in Youth Theater during the 

performances by mentioning particular details such as what materials appeared on stage, what 

the actors wore, and how the house was lit.  I quote John Burns of the New York Times:  

A charged silence settled over the theater as actors and audience 
took a long, painful pause, digesting a message of hope deceived 
that is a defining passage of a new dramatic production performed 
here for the first time on Tuesday.  To hear the silence of the 
packed house in the small theater in the city center was to feel the 
grief and disappointment that weigh on Sarajevo as it nears the end 
of its second summer under siege.73 

   
 
By declaring a match between the situation “on the ground” and the play using the stunned, 

silent, pensive, and emotional reaction of the in-person audience as evidence, the journalists 

declared Waiting for Godot a performative “success.”  The journalists indicated to their reading 

and listening audience that Godot re-fused the setting, script, audience, and actors into a shared 

experience of meaning.  They conveyed that everyone in Sarajevo understand exactly what 

Godot meant and why it was important to perform in Sarajevo at that moment.  And, 

importantly, during the performance of the play, performed around the world so many times 

before, the Sarajevan audience saw not only a classic dramatic work; they saw themselves.        

 

86

 

The journalists and critics who described and interpreted the production of Waiting for 

Godot conveyed to their listening and reading audience how apt the metaphor was for waiting, 

uncertainty, and anxiety in Sarajevo.  Many journalists repeated variations on the statement “The 

metaphor of waiting for intervention was well understood.”74  Often, they established the 

resonance of Godot by describing that the in-person audience was riveted by the performance, 

collectively understanding its significance in their place and time.  However, Beckett’s script and 

the metaphor of waiting did not speak unaided for the trauma of the Sarajevans.  Sontag and the 

actors changed significant elements of Beckett’s play including the set, the characters, and the 

length of the play to signify their circumstance and to narrate their trauma for the audience 

beyond the besieged city.  Such changes would be notable in almost any dramatic performance, 

but insertions into the play to establish the meaning of the situation is additionally surprising in 

Godot.  Beckett and his estate are (in)famously inflexible, rarely allowing productions to deviate 

from Beckett’s authorial intentions for the staging of his plays.75  More importantly for this 

study, by specifying the nature and players in a trauma the social actors insert a referent into a 

play that does not carry one of its own. 

 

Instead of one pair of protagonists, Sontag staged three pairs of Vladimirs and Estragons 

as “three variations on the theme of the couple” with one mixed gender, one male, and one 

female couple.  She reports she made the decision, at least in part, to “employ”—a symbolic 

rather than monetary concept—more actors (1994: 92).  However, a journalist quotes her 

explaining to her actors: “Beckett was still thinking in that old way of thinking; that if these 

                                                                                                                                                             
73 Burns, John F. 1993. “To Sarajevo, Writer Brings Good Will and ‘Godot.’” The New York Times, August 19.   
74 Narayan. 1993. The Guardian, August 20. 
75 See, for example, 1993. “Waiting for Godette.” The Times, September 1, Features. This news piece states that 
Sontag’s “real accomplishment” is staging Godot with female actresses while the Beckett estate sues other 
productions for the same substitution.    

 

87

characters are to be representative then they should be men.”76  In addition to lightening the 

burden on her exhausted and malnourished actors, Sontag explains that the extra pairs of 

travelers have the symbolic value of representing both men and women, male and female 

Sarajevans who wait for Godot alike and together.  Pomfret, writing for The Washington Post, 

declares: “This troika succeeds on the stage as each pair -- two women, two men, and a man and 

a woman -- explore different parts of the waiting game as they inhabit a world garnished with 

ammo boxes, sandbags and a hospital bed -- part of the spiritual architecture of life in 

Sarajevo.”77  Here, in addition to declaring the representation of all Sarajevans a success, 

Pomfret also indicates that the production introduced meanings of trauma into the set of Godot 

which is usually exceedingly sparce.  David Bradby argues that the most important aspect of the 

setting of Godot is its “neutrality: it provides an empty space, neither historically conditioned nor 

socially appropriated” (2001: 34).  However, Sontag’s actors presented Waiting for Godot “on a 

stage lit by candles, and with Red Cross boxes and UN sandbags as props…”78  In one of her 

nods to Beckett in her essay, Sontag comments that her staging was “as minimally furnished, I 

thought, as Beckett himself could have desired” (1994: 96).  She fails to mention the war 

paraphernalia invoking the Red Cross and The United Nations, material representations of 

trauma, decorating the stage.   

  

Sontag only staged the first act of the play.  In her essay on the production, she points out 

that the first act is “itself a complete play” without the repetition and the stasis of the second act 

(1994: 97).  She reports that she decided to stage only the first half of the play because her actors 

and audience could not sustain energy for a longer performance.  However, Sontag undermined 

                                                 
76 Eagar, Charlotte. 1993. “Radical-Chic Sontag Waits for Godot as Shells Shake Theatre of the Absurd.” The 
Observer, July 25, p. 13.   
77 Pomfret. 1993. The Washington Post, August 19.   

 

88

her explanation of this as a logistical, value-free decision in comments to the first- and second-

order audiences.  Pomfret attended a performance in Sarajevo where Sontag announced:  “Its 

correct title, then, is ‘Waiting for Godot: Act 1.’  We are all waiting for Act 2.”79  Of course, 

Beckett’s Godot never arrives.  Sontag’s Godot may still arrive in the Act 2 that is yet to unfold.  

Until he arrives—and perhaps even if he does—he is a guilty party in their trauma.   

 

So far, it sounds very much like all the journalists agree that Waiting for Godot was the 

right play at the right time in Sarajevo and that the residents of Sarajevo responded to this 

resonance and relevance.  This is, actually, largely true.  But that is not to say that there were no 

criticisms of staging Godot in Sarajevo.  The criticisms, however, did not pertain to whether or 

not the claims made implicitly and explicitly through the play—that the Sarajevans suffer from 

deep existential uncertainty and physical decline as they wait for the United States, the United 

Nations, and their European neighbors to intervene in the violence.  Rather, whether or not the 

play will be taken as a legitimate, successful social performance of trauma hinges on whether the 

performance was spontaneous and authentic.  Specifically, the motivations and actions of Susan 

Sontag coming to the beleaguered city to direct the play was at issue for the layers of audiences.  

Simply stated, the critical question is not whether the meanings encoded by the performance are 

correct; the critical question is whether Sontag should have directed the play.   

The most direct and vehement critic, Richard Grenier, wrote that Sontag has resumed her 

“her position as the artist-moralist of the Western world” in the “limelight” of Sarajevo.80  

Grenier’s was the most ardent formulation of what occurred in whispers in other news pieces: 

did Sontag seek out this high-profile cause to boost her own career or did she seek to bring the 

                                                                                                                                                             
78 William, David. 1993. “The Great Provider: Alemko Has it all at a Price Despite the Siege.” The Daily Mail, 
August 18, p. 12.  
79 Pomfret. 1993. The Washington Post, August 19.  .   
80 Grenier, Richard. 1993. “Sarajevo and Susan’s Sweet Sensibilities.” The Washington Times, August 30, p. E3.  

 

89

world’s attention to the situation in Sarajevo?  Is it legitimate for an intellectual from the U.S. to 

travel to a war zone to direct a play?  Although these questions were certainly not uniformly 

answered or resolved, many reporters’ accounts assure the third-order audience that Sontag’s 

presence and her work in the embattled Sarajevo theater scene were welcome by the Sarajevans.  

An editor of a Sarajevo newspaper that continued to publish during the shelling, Kemal 

Kurspahic, commented on the status of Sontag: “She is not a war tourist…She has really tried to 

come here and talk to us and understand the situation.”81  The same news story states, as do 

several other reports, that Sontag declines, out of a sense of equality and solidarity, to wear her 

flak jacket.  Some reporters write that a flak jacket lies nearby the famous intellectual, but, like 

her actors, she goes without.  Weighing in on her authenticity as an artist in Sarajevo, Sontag 

tells a reporter, “You have to have some reason to be here. I'm not just a voyeur. I was invited to 

take part in a theatre festival…”82  Journalists and critics declared Sontag’s production of 

Waiting for Godot a performative success.  The meanings resonated with the situation and the 

people.  Sontag’s changes to Beckett’s stage directions were not over-done and those 

embellishments did not take away from the power of the play’s simplicity.  Sontag’s position and 

job as director were (largely) authentic and the show’s connection with the audience seemed 

spontaneous and strong.  In short, most journalists declared Waiting for Godot a successful social 

performance in Sarajevo.       

 

New Orleans  
 
 

   
Graphic and performance artist Paul Chan knew about Sontag’s production of Waiting for 

Godot in Sarajevo when he brought a production of Beckett’s play to New Orleans in November 

2007.  Chan considers his production of Godot “within the lineage of imagining what it means to 

                                                 
81 Narayan. 1993 The Guardian, August 20. 

 

90

create art in places where we ought not to have any” which includes Sontag’s production. 83  

Supported by the public art nonprofit Creative Time, Chan mounted a multifaceted expressive 

project featuring a whispering campaign and local art practices including Second line brass 

bands.  Like Sontag’s production in Sarajevo, Chan dramatizes and communicates the situation 

of the people living in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina to the city’s residents and to the 

wider world.  And like Sontag’s production, Chan and the director Christopher McElroen and the 

stage actors added specific references to their city and their situation to Beckett’s austere drama.  

In a sense, Chan had at his disposal Beckett’s script for the play as well as a script written by 

Sontag’s production, the production at San Quentin, in South Africa and elsewhere for how to 

stage Waiting for Godot as a metaphor for trauma.  In these instances, though the play is touted 

as a “perfect” and “apt” metaphor, the nature of the trauma, the perpetrators, and the victims are 

explicitly referenced via the characters, set, costumes, and other theatrical elements.  The second 

“script” of Godot as a social performance of trauma indicates what can be altered in Beckett’s 

play to make it speak for and construct the trauma at hand.  Journalists comment on this 

“lineage” and how Chan uses the script passed down to him from Sontag, the prison productions, 

and others.84  Also like the production in Sarajevo, in addition to expressive aptness which is 

required for the play to express and narrate trauma, the legitimacy of artists who direct and 

produce the play are at issue for residents and journalists.   

Chan’s production went beyond Beckett’s script and the previous productions from his 

“lineage” to mount a social performance of community and trauma.  To advertise the 

performances, Chan and his theater group posted signs including only Beckett’s first stage 

                                                                                                                                                             
82 Narayan. 1993 The Guardian, August 20. 
83 Simon, Scott. 2007. “Still Waiting on Repairs, New Orleans Hosts ‘Godot.’” Weekend Edition Saturday, National 
Public Radio, November 3.  

 

91

directions: “A country road.  A tree.  Evening.”  This whispering campaign knew no boundaries 

of class, race, or hurricane destruction; “good” and “bad” neighborhoods alike were garnished 

with the signs.85  A journalist for the New York Times describes that they “added up to a visual 

network, art as a connective tissue for a torn-apart town.”86  He interprets for his readers that the 

social bonds that were broken through the storm will be restored through art’s catharsis.  Before 

the show went up, the producer and others involved with the production hosted theater 

workshops and attended pot-luck dinners with a variety of New Orleans residents.  The Times-

Picayune’s coverage of this multifaceted art project helped to send out a casting call for local 

actors to audition for the play.87  Chan cast three actors from the Classical Theater of Harlem 

production of Waiting for Godot, including Wendell Pierce who plays Detective Moreland on the 

popular television show The Wire and is a native son of New Orleans.  Chan cast a local actor, 

Mark McLaughlin, as Lucky, and two young local actors shared the role of the Boy.88  The local 

paper also listed phone numbers to call for reservations for the show and issued a call for 

volunteers to help with various aspects of the production.89  The Times-Picayune advertised that 

at each of the free performances the audience would share a gumbo dinner before being led into 

the seating area by Second line bands.90 The play was performed at a street corner in the Lower 

Ninth Ward and in front of a destroyed house in Gentilly.  In his artist statement, Chan explains 

that staging the play outside with the brass band “connects with the city’s storied tradition of 

street performance, from Mardi Gras to the Second lines that leisurely snake through streets and 

                                                                                                                                                             
84 Simon. 2007. Weekend Edition Saturday, National Public Radio, November 3; Cotter, Holland. 2007.  “A Broken 
City.  A Tree.  Evening.” The New York Times, December 2, Section 2, p. 1.  
85 Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2.  
86 Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2. 
87 Cuthbert, David. 2007. “Katrina ‘Godot’ a Go: Wendell Pierce Set to Star in Hurricane-Themed Adaptation of 
Classic Play in New Orleans.” The Times-Picayune, September 15.  
88 Cuthbert, David. 2007. The Times-Picayune. October 26.  
89 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune. October 26. 

 

92

neighborhoods.”91  Cotter reported in the New York Times that thousands of people attended the 

shows, and an extra performance was added to accommodate audience demand.92  The first-

order audience did not merely occupy seats in a theater.  Local residents, food, and music, were 

part of the performance in New Orleans.  On the day of the first performance, the Times-

Picayune quoted Pierce exclaiming with a laugh, “We're gonna have a lot of New Orleans in 

this!”93  The local flavor surrounding the stage performance expresses to residents and to those

 

outside the city that New Orleans has a unique and vibrant culture that should not languish or 

disappe

ar.      

Much of the journalistic coverage, the comments by the second-order audience, focuse

d 

on the parallels between the characters, setting, and plot of Godot and the residents and their 

lives in New Orleans.  Holland Cotter, writing for The New York Times, comments on th

e apt 

pairing of the text and the situation in Gentilly and the Lower Ninth Ward: “Under the 

circumstances, Beckett’s words sounded less like an existentialist cri de coeur than like a ter

se 

topographic description.”94  Cotter conveys to his reader that the set of Godot which seems 

peculiarly sparce to many audiences is simple description of reality in New Orleans.  The te

xt 

and the landscape merge, but a journalist for the Times-Picayune writes that the resonance 

between the play and the situation is fully expressed only through the performance: “Many lines 

in the ‘Godot’ text take on new meaning post-Katrina, but it is not until the actors speak them

 at 

the barren intersection in the Lower 9th Ward—both blighted and beautiful—that their full 

 
                                                                                                                                                        
    
90
 Cuthbert, David. 2007. “A Play in the Street: For New Orleanians, ‘Waiting for Godot’ Hits the Spot.” The Times-
Picayune, November 2.  
91 Chan, Paul.  June 2007. “Waiting for Godot in New Orleans: An Artist Statement.” Available 
http://www.creativetime.org/programs/archive/2007/chan/artist_statement.pdf, last accessed 04/29/08.   
92 Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2. 
93 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 2. 
94 Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2. 

 

93

immediacy and import is felt.”95  Another journalist for the Times-Picayune illustrates this 

“immediacy and import” by quoting the woman he sat next to at the performance in the Ni

nth 

Ward who lives in the neighborhood.  When Estragon sat on a curb on the stage, the woman 

remarked, “He's sitting the

re like me sitting on my stoop.”96  Beckett’s characters and the 

charact

ers in the drama of Katrina wait just the same, sitting on the stoop and watching up t

he 

road for Godot to arrive.   

Like the woman in the Ninth Ward who sits on her stoop, several articles about the 

production of Godot convey that the characters in this social performance have their own 

experiences of waiting like Beckett’s hobos, the stage characters.  McLaughlin, who plays 

Lucky, told a reporter for the Times-Picayune, “I see this 'Godot' every single day on my block, 

where a Baptist church is a clearinghouse for all kinds of people in need.”97  An article in the 

Times-Picayune divulges that Pierce, the famous television and movie actor, is angry about his 

parents’ experiences tangling with government bureaucracy and “politics” to get recovery m

oney 

after losing their home during Katrina.  The reporter writes, “They [Pierce’s parents] went down 

to the office and found themselves playing an absurdist scene right out of “Godot.”98  The 

characters of the social performance of trauma go beyond the stage actors.  Radio and newspaper 

journalists introduce their third-order audience to Lower Ninth Ward resident Robert 

Green who 

lost both his mother and his granddaughter in the storm.  Chan gave Green a copy of Waiting

 for 

Godot.  At first he was skeptical of an outsider producing a play on the streets in his 

neighborhood, but after Green read the play, he left a screaming message on Chan’s answer 

 
                                                
95 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 2. 
96 MacCash, Doug. 2007. “Worth the Wait: Standing-Room Crowds Create Havoc, but 'Godot'-Goers go with the 
Flow.” The Times-Picayune, November 6.  
97 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 2. 
98 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 2. 

 

94

machine: he had to be part of the project.99  A writer for the Times-Picayune places Green in 

his 

scene on show night.  Green welcomed the play’s audience, but the journalist hesitates to say “to 

his neighbhorhood” for Green’s neighbors are gone, 

and he waits for them to come back.100  

Green is Vladimir and Estragon.  The stage actors bring Beckett’s characters to life on stage, and

 

they are bringing Green’s story to life as well.          

 

In Sarajevo, Godot was performed concurrently with the violent siege; in New Orle

ans, 

more than two years elapsed between the storm and the production of Godot.  Through the multi-

faceted social performance, the Waiting for Godot production and project in New Orleans 

articulated that the people in New Orleans continue to wait for the disaster, and the trauma, to 

end.  One way that the production articulated the residents of New Orleans as “victims” was by 

casting a mix of African-American and local actors.  The Lower Ninth Ward and Gentilly are 

predominantly black neighborhoods.  Flooding in the city and the miserably slow response fro

m 

the local, state, and federal governments disproportionately affected black neighborhood

s and 

black residents.  By casting Beckett’s travelers to “look like” the people in New Orleans, the 

production represented the identity of those who are the victims of an ongoing trauma.  

 

We can also think about the production of Waiting for Godot and the other aspects of the 

art project as a counter-performance to the rhetoric and placations that politicians have offere

d 

the residents of New Orleans.  New Orleans was the backdrop for John Edwards’s entrance int

o 

and exit from the 2008 presidential campaign, at the end of 2006 and the beginning of 2008 

respectively.  Countless other politicians and agency representatives travel to New Orleans to 

give press conferences assuring the residents and people throughout the United States that Ne

w 

Orleans is on the top of the political agenda.  There have been many improvements in the city, 

                                                
99 Simon. 2007. Weekend Edition Saturday, National Public Radio, November 3. 
100 DeBerry, Jarvis. 2007. “Waiting, Wondering? We Can Relate.” The Times-Picayune, November 6.   

 

 

95

but years after the hurricane, neighborhoods like the Lower Ninth Ward and Gentilly remain 

largely in tatters.  The counter-performance of the Waiting for Godot artistic project expresses 

and articulates their continuing trauma: the residents of the Lower Ninth Ward and Gentilly are 

still waiting, uncertain of their fate and abandoned by Godot.   

 

The second-order audience, the journalists, and the residents they interview claim that

 the 

play represents the situation of the people of the Crescent City.  Like Beckett’s hobos, they wait 

for an object of desire which they only know in a hazy form.  Who is Godot?  When is relief 

coming?  When will the city return to “normal”?  There is no dispute in any of the newspaper or 

television reports, local or national, which I surveyed that Beckett’s play uniquely represents life 

in New Orleans.  Like in Sarajevo, questions about the legitimacy of the play, and the legiti

macy 

of the social performance carried on through and around it, focus on the producers and dire

ctors 

who came to New Orleans from outside the city.  Can artists legitimately create a claim to 

someone else’s trauma?  We learn from the productions of Godot in Sarajevo and in New 

Orleans that they may if they properly engage the local population by hiring them as actors, 

costumers, and stage hands.  Chan goes beyond this to partner with various community groups; 

two separate articles in the Times-Picayune and an article in The New York Times list a long 

roster of local partners in the Godot project including high schools, universities, and comm

unity 

organizations.101  Writing for the Times-Picayune, MacCash and Cuthbert write that Chan 

made 

New Orleans his “temporary home” for the duration of the Godot project. 102   He’s not an 

insider, of course, but they convey that he is not merely a tourist-artist cashing in on New 

Orleans’s misfortunes either.  In fact, they go on to quote an art-world insider who suggests that 

 
                                                
101 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, September 15, Cuthbert, David. 2007. “‘Godot’ Makes the Bean Scene.” 
The Times-Picayune, October 27, and Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2.   
102 MacCash, Doug and Cuthbert, David. 2007. “Artist Paul Chan Brings his ‘Godot’ to a Waiting City.” The Times-
Picayune, November 2.  

 

96

having big-name artists and actors can be a good thing because the “power elites” of the art 

world will be at New Orleans’s “doorstep” thanks to Chan’s project.  And, indeed, national and 

international newspaper and radio journalists covered Chan’s project and, through this coverage, 

conveyed the meaning of the play and the meaning of the trauma to a wide third-order audience.
  

David Cuthbert, who covered the production over a span of two months for the Times-Pica

yune 

summed up the project’s success in 

unifying and representing the broken city and its people for 

is readers: “The haves and have-nots in New Orleans right now are those who have seen 
h

‘G

odot’ and those who haven't.”103 

 
Conclusion 
 

Claims to trauma are not always made directly in the trauma process.  Of course, they 

may be.  Political leaders deliver speeches to assign guilt and to argue for the veracity of th

eir 

claims to trauma.  Textbooks teach children the “truth” of past conflicts, specifying the aggressor 

and the victim, the trauma and the triumph.  The basic questions which must be answered 

through the trauma process—“the nature of the pain, the nature of the victim, the relation of the

 

 
trauma victim and the wider audience, and the attribution of responsiblitity” (Alexander 2004:

13-15)—are, by virtue of the status of guilt and innocence at stake, usually quite con

tentious.  

Who is to blame?  What is to be blamed for?  What should the responsible party do about it?  

Often, these questions are not posed and the answers are not given directly through 

straightforward political speech.  Claims made during the trauma process have two forms: f

actual 

truth and expressivity.  The productions of Waiting for Go

dot in Sarajevo and New Orleans are 

social p

erformances whose “success” is not achieved in the register of factual truth.  Their 

success is achieved in the register of expressive aptness.   

 
                                                
103 Cuthbert, David. 2007. “Audience Completes ‘Godot’: The Play is Not the Thing if No One is There to Hear it.” 

 

97

Some claims to trauma accuse.  Through fact-oriented speech and action, social 

actors 

indict a party as guilty or refuse blame.  Other claims to trauma reveal.  Through expressive 

performance, social actors represent the elements of trauma.  Truth and Reconciliation 

Commissions, though surely performative in some senses (cite Tanya Goodman?), appeal to 

factual and experiential truth.  Participants formally state where they were, what happened to

 

them, and by whom.  Victims name perpetrators and their crimes.  In contrast, through the case 

study of Waiting for Godot, I argue that social performance of trauma appeals to expressive

 

truth.  Individuals in Saraje

vo and New Orleans do not literally wait on a road, but the metaphor 

of wait

ing for help whose arrival is dubious and whose identity is unknown speaks for and 

narrates their trauma.        

Journalists, critics, and academics declare that Waiting for Godot is a metaphor for these 

situations.  The set is a metaphor for the bleakness of landscape following a disaster; waiting for

 

Godot is a metaphor for waiting these situations to end.  However, even the most apt metaphor

s 

do not speak for themselves.  I challenge the notion that the play simply stands for the situation 

of trauma.  Instead, I show that social actors inject the play with meanings in order to express 

their situation as a trauma.  Yet, to speak too explicitly of blame and the status of victims turns 

metaphor into bald politics.  If made explicit, claims to guilt and innocence may be accepted

 or 

rejected on the grounds of truth claims.  Like so many paintings (Picaso’s Guernica is perhaps 

the most famous example) and films (Roots

 is an American example), and other art forms, 

Waiting

 for Godot narrates the trauma and expresses charges of guilt without making accusations 

in the political realm or a court of justice.  

Productions of Waiting for Godot, as I discovered, were not judged according to factually 

accuracy.  Such a rubric simply would not make sense.  Instead, the audiences to these 

                                                                                                                                                            
The Times-Picayune, November 10.   

 

 

98

productions of Waiting for Godot pronounced the performances a success or failure based on t

he 

aptness of the expression for capturing the experiences of the residents in each city.  This is not 

only a separate rubric from other claims to trauma, but of course a different rubric of succe

ss 

than most theatrical performances.  The acting, directing, costuming, and stage design w

ere not 

based exclusively on the logic of the theater, but also on the logic of social performance.  

Audiences expected the actors to embody Vladimir and Estragon, sure, but there was a 

simultaneous expectation that they personify the residents of the cities as well.  Audiences did 

not only appreciate Godot as a literary masterpiece but as the representation of their plight.  L

ike 

Austin’s speech performatives, social performance cannot be true or false; they are “felicitous or

 

infelicitous.”  Rauer writes, “The only epistemological doubt that can be raised concerns the 

pragmatic question of whether the act is infelicitous, inadequate, or fabricated…” (2006: 259).  

Since performatives and social performance do not merely describe social reality but have the 

ability to create a new social reality, they can create social reality that other forms of action

 (e.g. 

political speeches, court trials, and awareness campaigns relying on facts as evidence) can

not.  

Questions, therefore, abound on the “adequacy of the symbol, not its truth” and regarding 

whether the correct person took the correct action (2006: 259).  The success of the social 

performance is judged in part on the aptness of the play.  Is it too intellectual?  Is it too dark?  Is 

the play overdone?  Two writers for the Times-Picayune write that if they were exposed to

 

Waiting for Godot in another circumstance they might have thought the text too high-brow, but 

in New Orleans it is perfectly apt.

104  The writers are not intimidated or bored by the play 

because it represents life in their city.  The success of the social performance also depends on 

the 

authenticity and legitimacy of the artists.   In both Sarajevo and New Orleans, Waiting for God

ot 

 
                                                
104 DeBerry. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 6 and Maloney, Ann. 2007. “Wait with Me: N.O. May be the 
Richest Ravaged City in the World.” The Times-Picayune, November 9. 

 

99

was put on only because a famous (more so in the first case) and well-funded (more so

 in the 

second) intellectual and artist came to the city to produce the play.  Accordingly, the audience 

asks, what is the status of the imported intellectuals?  Are they grabbing attention for 

themselves?  Are they investing in the community or just putting up a production and leaving?

  

Sontag and Chan walk a performative tight-rope.  They must be able to create art that fuses with 

the local audience.  Yet to create a social performance making claims to trauma they must be

 

able to reach beyond the city, the site 

of the collective trauma, to journalists who will convey the 

social p

erformance to a national and international audience.  They must be local and global, 

speaking to and speaking for both.    

In his essay “Notes on Beauty,” Peter Schjeldahl writes, “Insensibility to beauty may b

e 

an index of misery” (1994: 59).  In contradiction to this assertion, actors, directors, producers 

and audiences seek out and shape Beckett’s Waiting for Godot to claim and specify t

rauma.  

Accounts of these productions indicate an astute sensitivity to and connection with this great 

work of theater.  Social actors have shaped their aesthetic experience to specify and 

communicate the circumstances, perpetrators and victims of their trauma to themselves and to a 

wider audience; they have turned theater performance into social performance of trauma.  

Indeed, I argue that it may be through be

auty, through aesthetics and art works, that social actors 

m

ake a claims to trauma which will not be not be judged based on factual accuracy but on the 

ptness of the expression of meaning.   
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

100

 
 
 
 
 
Refere
 
Alexander, Jeffrey C. 2004. “Toward a Theory of Cultural Trauma” Pp.1-30 in Cultural Trauma
and Collective Identity.  Ed. Jeffrey C. Alexander, Ron Eyerman, Bernhard Giesen, Neil 
J. Smelser and Piotr Sztompka. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press 

nces  

 

 
------. 2006. “Cultural Pragmatics: Social Performance Between Ritual and Strategy,” Pp.29-9

0 
in Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual. Ed. Jeffrey C. 
Alexand

er, Bernhard Giesen and Jason L. Mast. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   

 
Alexander, Jeffrey C, Ron Eyerman, Bernhard Giesen, Neil J. Smelser, and Piotr Sztompka. 

2004.  Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity.  Berkeley, CA: University of Californi
Press.   

a 

 
Alexander, Jeffrey C, Bernhard Giesen, and Jason L. Mast, eds.  2006. Social P

erformance: 
Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.   

air, Deirdre. 1978. Samuel Beckett.  New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  

eckett, Samuel.  1954. Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two Acts.  New York: Grove 

Press.  

 
Bradby, David.  2001.  Beckett: Waiting for Godot.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Pre
 
E
 
------. 1995. “Notes on Trauma and Community” Pp.183-199 in Trauma: Explorations in 

rikson, Kai T. 1976. Everything in Its Path. New York: Simon and Schuster Paperbacks.  

Memory ed. Cathy Caruth. Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University Press.  

ss.   

 
B
 
B

 
M

 

 

 
Esslin, 

 
Eyerma

Martin. 1980 [1961] The Theatre of the Absurd, 3rd Edition. Middlesex, E
Books Ltd.  

ngland: Penguin 

n, Ron and Lisa McCormick, eds.  2006.  Myth, Meaning, and Performance: Toward a 
New Cultural Sociology of the Arts.  Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers. 

ast, Jason. 2006. “The Cultural Pragmatics of Event-ness: the Clinton/ Lewinsky Affair,” Pp. 
115- 145 in Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual. Ed. 
Jeffrey C. Alexander, Bernhard Giesen and Jason L. Mast. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.  .   

101

Rauer, Valentin. 2006. “Symbols in Action: Willy Brandt’s Kneefall at the Warsaw Memorial,” 
Pp. 257-282 in Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual. 
r, Bernhard Giesen and Jason L. Mast. Cambridge: Cambridge 
Ed. Jeffrey C. Alexande
University Press.   

rank. 1988. “Stage View: Cutting to the Heart of the Way We Live Now.” The New York 
Times, December 25.   

 
Rich, F

 
Schjeld

ahl, Peter. 1998. “Notes on Beauty,” Pp. 53-59 in Uncontrollable Beauty: T
Aesthetics. Ed. Bill Beckley and David Shapiro. New York: 
Allworth Press.  

oward a New 

 
Schneider, Alan. 1967. “Waiting for Beckett: A Personal Chronicle” in Casebook on Wai

ting for 

Godot: The Impact of Beckett’s Modern Classic: Reviews, Reflections and 
Interpretations. Ed. Ruby Cohn. New York: Grove Press.   

, Susan. 1994. “Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo.”  Performing Arts Journal 16

 
Sontag
 
Smelser, Neil. 2004. “Psychological Trauma and Cultural Trauma” in Cultural Trauma and
ernhard Giesen, Neil J. 

Collective Identity.  Ed. Jeffrey Alexander, Ron Eyerman, B
Smelser and Piotr Sztompka. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press 

: 2.  

 

 
T

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

oole, David.  1998.  Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo: Theological Reflections on Nihilism, 

Tragedy, and Apocalypse.  Boulder, CO: Westview Press.   

102

Yale University 

Center for Cultural Sociology 

 
 

Trauma Workshop 
June 15-16, 2009 

Athens 

The drama of the Greek civil war trauma 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Nicolas Demertzis 

ndemert@media.uoa.gr

 

 
 
semi-final draft

 

103

