II 

 

 

“The Kosovo mythology operates as an alternative field of logic, history, and reality. In this 
alternate reality, the configurations of hate stereotypes ... make sense. ... At some point ... Kosovo 
mythology became so strong that those who tried to manipulate it ... found themselves slaves to 
the expectations and interior logic of this ideology of eternal conflict unto extermination.” (Sells 
2002: 67) 
 
“The crux of the grand narrative ... is the way in which present-day Albanians, or alternatively 
Bosnian Muslims, are looked upon as ‘Turk-surrogates’, that is, as symbolic stand-ins for the real 
Turks (Ottomans) who defeated (Serb) Prince Lazar 600 years ago in 1389 at the Battle of 
Kosovo.” (Vetlesen 2005: 179) 
 
“The loss of power was particularly traumatic for the Serbs. ... The myths dealing with the loss of 
the medieval empire served to create a nationalist frenzy at the moment when ... a unique 
opportunity [seemed to be provided] for the realization of the central promise of Serbian national 
mythology, the creation of the Second Serbian Empire.” (Anzulović 1999: 2)  

“Serbs began to feel the defeat in Kosovo as if it had occurred only yesterday. ... Based on the 
past trauma and time collapse, Serbs perceived a threat when one did not actually exist and felt 
compelled to act against it. Thus the collective idea that Muslims had to be exterminated slowly 
began to develop.” (Volkan 2002: 93, 96) 

The first group of statements view Serbs as a nation decisively defined by the traumatic 

but ennobling memory of the Battle of Kosovo. It is believed that the “Kosovo pledge” – the 
choice of the “heavenly kingdom” and the self-effacing heroism of Serbian fighters – which 
Serbs have adhered to throughout the centuries, makes them a better kind of people, brave and 
virtuous, unassuming but tenacious, profoundly spiritual. This account will be called celebratory 
discourse. 

The second group represents a view that is in many respects the polar opposite of the 
first. It is highly critical of Serbs and denies them any and all of such beautiful qualities. They 
are depicted as a power-hungry nation prone to aggression against others, especially their weaker 
neighbors. In these destructive actions Serbs are propelled by a pernicious myth in whose grips 
they are hopelessly caught, losing any rational sense of reality. This is denouncing discourse. 

The former discourse tends to be an insider one, set forth by Serbs, especially those who 
readily self-identify as such, while the latter is generally an outsider discourse, put forward from 
without by non-Serb observers and commentators. This preferential association between the 
content and the speaker’s location is of course not absolute,208 but it is both quantitatively and 
symbolically preponderant. 

Opposed as they are, the two discourses share more than would be expected. Their 

Ontologization of Trauma. First, they both believe that the mythicized collective 

common ground is marked by three basic assumptions. 
 
remembrance of the Battle of Kosovo is indelibly imprinted on the Serbian mind. On both sides 
the Kosovo Myth is construed as trauma, as the Serbian Trauma. Whether this is extolled or 
                                                 
208 There are also denouncing insiders and an occasional celebrating outsider. Critically minded insiders (e.g. Popov 
2000; Čolović 2001, 2002), while concurring in many respects with the denouncing outsiders, are free from gross 
oversimplifications and factual errors that abound in the latter’s works. As for the sympathetic outsiders, it is worth 
noting that a rare example of this kind (Emmert 1990) was written well before the outbreak of Yugoslav wars.  

 

226

Exoticization of Serbs. In both discourses, Serbs are essentialized into a special kind of 

denigrated, it is taken as a fact that Serbs have mourned the Kosovo defeat for centuries.209 
Furthermore, this thing, the Kosovo Trauma, not just passively exists but is an active factor in 
shaping Serbs’ actions. As a result, it produces consequences in reality and affects also the lives 
the lives of others – whether they are seen as targets of Serbian aggression (version II) or 
beneficiaries of Serbian chivalrous idealism (version I).  
 
people, a race apart. The incorporation of the Kosovo Trauma makes them different from 
anybody else, producing their radical alterity. Unlike other nations, Serbs glorify death and 
celebrate defeat. The pain of the Trauma and the thirst for revenge turns them into savage 
aggressors(II)/ self-sacrificing heroes(I) in their constant conflicts with various enemies. Due to 
the Trauma, they have remained immune to the ills(I)/ benefits(II) of Western modernity. Serbs 
are irrational, inscrutable and unpredictable, controlled by mysterious emotional forces working 
from within them. They are the Savage – whether Noble or Ignoble. 
 
and perceives the nation as a homogeneous body. It is “Serbs” who feel, remember, believe, 
think, sing, or imagine. There is no mention of disagreement or multiplicity of voices. 
Denouncers almost never speak of internal differences in opinion among “Serbs” concerning the 
Kosovo legacy, its interpretation or use. For the celebrators, the invocations of “every Serb” and 
“all Serbs” is a central element of their very discursive stance, which importantly depends on 
magically obliterating dissent and heterogeneity within. 

Homogenization of Serbs. The third assumption stems logically from the preceding two, 

Beside such internal similarities, the two arguments share one more feature: they are both 

currently hegemonic in their respective areas of influence. The interest in the Kosovo Myth 
received a strong impetus with the outbreak of wars in former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s. The 
widespread perception of Serbs as the main culprits for Yugoslavia’s bloody collapse and chief 
perpetrators of atrocities prompted many too look for causes of such behavior in the Serbian 
cultural past, and to find a pivotal point in the Kosovo Myth. An unbroken line was established 
extending from late 14th century through 19th-century Serbian nationalism to the present day. It 
was postulated that the traumatic memory of the Kosovo failure which Serbs were never able to 
overcome, this unhealed wound, spurred them to aggression, expansionism, trampling on others’ 
rights and, finally, genocide.  

Over the past fifteen or so years in the international public opinion, including the 

scholarly one, Serbs have become rather firmly entrenched as the example of a nation going 
amok. They have been likened to the Holocaust perpetrators, an association which is not just an 
ordinary political slander but a ritual pollution, and thus cannot be shed by rational 
demonstrations of innocence (Alexander 2004b: 244).210 This is the background that determines 
current international receptions of the Kosovo symbolism. The latter is used, almost self-
evidently by now, as an explanatory tool. In a recent book about the notion of genocide (Vetlesen 
2005), Serbs are the central example, and the Kosovo Myth is matter-of-factly referred to as a 
major trigger of their genocidal actions. For the psychiatrist Vamik Volkan (1996, 2001, 2002) 
Serbs and their Kosovo legacy proved particularly instrumental in building the theory of “chosen 
                                                 
209 True, quite a few denouncers dispute the historical record of the Battle, or otherwise point at the spuriousness of 
the Trauma, as something that Serbs have made up rather than experienced. Yet this is still ontologization insofar as 
Serbs are held to believe in this fabrication and act upon it. 
210 See also Alexander 2004b: 246-249 for a discussion of the analogy between the Holocaust and Serbs’ conduct in 
the 1990s wars. 

 

227

trauma”.211 Šuber (2006) flatly declares Serbia is an “imperative subject” for studying 
interrelatedness of myth and politics, and singles out the Kosovo myth as the factor conditioning 
Serbian behavior lately. Michael Billig, in his otherwise thoroughly original book (Billig 1995), 
looks for the sharpest possible contrast with the bland, “banal” nationalism of the Western 
democracies and finds it in, whom else, Serbs.212 Countless more examples could be cited, but 
the point is that the Kosovo Myth is presented in a misleadingly univocal manner, as conveying 
invariably a single message over many centuries: a message of unyielding collectivism, 
adoration of war and death, aggressive militarism, and particularistic anti-humanism.  
 
Yet it has been curiously overlooked how much this account, minus the negative moral 
judgment, agrees with the most uncritical and self-congratulatory internal Serbian view of the 
Kosovo tradition. Western disparaging accounts portray Serbs in precisely the way the 
staunchest Serbian nationalists prefer to see their nation. Seen from this angle, the two sides 
cooperate closely. They work together in a formidable joint effort to constrain the Serbian 
identity to a single symbolic structure – the “Kosovo Myth” – and a particular version of it at 
that. Although they are usually articulated as a hostile response to, and in order to undercut the 
claims of, one another, even this apparent opposition contributes to their objective cooperation. I 
will return to this. 

In the analysis that follows, the twin accounts presented above will be used as a foil 

against which to test new openings. I will take a closer look at how they were constructed and 
how they are still being constructed. All three shared assumptions will be challenged. To begin 
with, I will seek to de-ontologize the Kosovo Trauma, or to de-traumaticize Kosovo symbolism. 
The traumaticness of Kosovo for Serbs is not a fact but a social process, an “ongoing practical 
accomplishment” as Garfinkel would put it, which can be traced and described. Secondly, as for 
essentialization, I am convinced that Serbs are not so much different from other nations as they 
would sometimes like to think of themselves or as they are frequently portrayed by outsiders; 
and that for analyzing things Serbian the usual instruments of the social sciences will perfectly 
do.213 Thirdly, it will be shown how homogenization is harnessed to the political usability of 
Kosovo symbolism in the internal political arena for purposes of exclusion, undermining the 
development of genuine pluralism.  

It is my intention to explore the strategically important ambiguities, gaps, loops, nesting 

implications, loose ends, double-entendres, misunderstandings better left unclarified etc. It is 
such discursive plays which, I believe, are mainly responsible for the Myth’s enduring power, 
especially a continuous shifting along the axis of universality vs. particularity.  

I hope to show this to be an excellent example of how cultural structures operate within 

the dynamically unfolding historical contexts, in constant tension between the autonomous 
strength or “semiotic resistance” of sedimented and patterned cultural meanings, on one hand, 
and the contingencies of political, economic, and military circumstances, on the other. Cultural 
structures, though flexible and open-ended enough to remain meaningful over for so long and 
                                                 
211 Neither Volkan nor Vetlesen are Balkans specialists, but this does not seem to be a hindrance. 
212 “[S]urely, there is a distinction between the flag waved by Serbian ethnic cleansers and that hanging 
unobtrusively outside the US post office” (1995: 6). It will be a concern of this chapter to show that the Kosovo 
Myth can serve, and has served, not only the purposes of “hot nationalism” but of the “banal” one as well – 
underpinning, one might say, “the flag hanging unobtrusively outside the Serbian post office”. 
213 The assumption that Serbs are profoundly different may lead to the kind of intellectual abdication van de Port 
(1999) openly advocates in proclaiming that “it takes a Serb to know a Serb”, an idea which he claims to have 
arrived at by “taking seriously what Serbs tell about themselves”. Here the Serbian radical-alterity- posturing 
happily coincides with an outsider’s postmodernist destruction of social science. 

 

228

through so diverse situations, have also been resistant enough not to allow for just any use that 
someone might wish to put them to. These structures have displayed an ability to channel 
interpretations into some directions at the expense of others, restricting the range of the possible. 
On the other hand, cultural structures cannot operate in a vacuum producing, like a machine, 
always the same pre-packed hermeneutic output. Finally, they do not operate by themselves but 
require living, thinking, acting and, especially, speaking agents.214 Kosovo has become the main 
Serbian “entrenched story” (Živković 2001a: xii) – the community’s most powerful 
communication resource because, having been told and retold in thousands of times and ways, 
has acquired a unique intertextual thickness.215  

My theoretical terrain can be delineated by juxtaposing the Dragnich-Todorovich 

sentence quoted above – “Kosovo is many diverse things to different living Serbs, but they all 
have it in their blood“ – and a seemingly similar one used by Eyerman (2002: 18) to characterize 
the role of slavery in the forging of African American identity: “Slavery has meant different 
things for different generations of black Americans, but it was always there as a referent“ (italics 
added). It is in the space between blood and referent that I wish to move, from the former to the 
latter. A referent is something you can follow and describe how, where, when and by whom it 
has been referred to; and in this way, you may hope to re-trace in the reverse direction the 
passage it covered in turning into the alleged blood.216 

Two reservations are in order here. First, I will only deal with Kosovo as a Serbian 

symbolic referent. Albanians, who make up the overwhelming majority of inhabitants of Kosovo 
as a real territory and newly independent Balkan country seeking full international recognition, 
also feel Kosovo to be “more than” just a piece of land.  For them too, Kosovo has sacred 
attributes and this sacralization is similarly based on suffering and heroism. Though it would be 
fascinating to examine the parallels between Albanian and Serbian constructions of Kosovo as 
traumatic, this must remain beyond the scope of this chapter.217 Second, when referring to 
“Kosovo”, I will mean the symbolic, abstract meaning, not Kosovo as a real place, unless I 
specifically indicate so. I will not deal with the more directly political, legal or security issues 
involved in the Kosovo crisis since the late 1980s. The abstract and the concrete cannot of course 
be completely disentangled, all the more so because Kosovo as territory has been the bone of 
contention over which Serbs and Albanians have vied for the last one hundred and fifty years. 
For Serbs, Kosovo is a sacred symbol not only because of the Battle but also for the presence on 
the soil of real Kosovo of precious cultural monuments, most notably medieval churches and 
monasteries. Thus when Serbs claim Kosovo is the “cradle of Serbhood”, they ambiguously refer 
                                                 
214 While bewaring the mythification of the Myth itself, its purely instrumentalist alternative is no better. Thus 
Malcolm (1998: 80) writes that “[t]here is simply no evidence to suggest that any Serb ever drew the idea of a 
special ‘Kosovo covenant’ ... before the nineteenth century” and, in response to a Serbian author who called Kosovo 
tradition the “permanent connective tissue among Serbs”, continues: “‘Permanent’ is perhaps not the most obvious 
choice of word for such a very recent product of nationalist ideological history”. A cultural sociology cannot afford 
to deal so dismissively with meaning-structures. 
215 “Entrenched story” is a narrative a community comes to be stuck with, which “becomes ever more entrenched 
even as it is bitterly contested, for any new reference only serves to make it associatively richer”. Its elasticity in 
interpretative and pragmatic terms is due to the fact that its elements “trail behind them a long history of previous 
uses” (Živković 2001a: xii-xiii) 
216 Dragnich and Todorovich’s blood is not the only one, cf.: “Deeply rooted in the mind of the people, the Kosovo 
tradition is still torturing Serbian blood” (Djordjević 1991: 324 – interestingly, another Serbian American 
academic). 
217 For hints, see Vickers 1998; Luci and Marković 2008; Zdravković 2005; Duijzings 2000. On recent 
symbolizations of Kosovo Albanian victimhood see Di Lellio and Schwandner-Sievers 2006. 

 

229

to both the embodied place and the sacred idea, and the dynamic between an abstracting, de-
territorializing symbolization and recurrent re-territorialization of “Kosovo” has been quite 
important in the cultural history of the notion.218 However, Kosovo as a contemporary political 
issue is far too complex to be dealt with summarily.  

My argument will proceed in four steps. To begin, I will trace how the apparently unitary 

Myth, its form finalized in the early 19th century, operated within a number of vastly different 
ideological-political programs in modern Serbian and Yugoslav history. Next, I will try to tease 
out the Myth’s strategic ambivalences and the ways in which it is continuously discursively 
reproduced in specific instances. A discussion of the official and vernacular interpretations in the 
most recent period will follow, to conclude with some general implications.  
 
 
Cultural structures and their contexts: the shaping of the Myth 
 
1. The beginnings: 14-18th centuries  
The Kosovo legend was spun over several centuries from elements originating in three kinds of 
sources, one oral and two written. The epic folk poetry about the Battle of Kosovo had been 
preserved and transmitted until 19th c. as a living oral tradition, at first chivalric and feudal in 
literary form and social location, to become more rural, popular and patriarchal with the 
disappearance of the native Serbian elite.219 The two kinds of written sources involve religious 
writings (sermons, eulogies, hagiographies), and secular works (travelogues, biographies, 
chronicles). In a fine example of what nowadays would be called intertextuality, the various 
sources intermingled and borrowed from each other, motifs and elements flowing from one to 
the other in different directions. To try to set apart the “factual” and the “imaginary” within the 
Kosovo symbolism is difficult and, moreover, unproductive, because it is only in their 
conjunction that the two levels represent an active cultural structure.  

What would become known as the Battle of Kosovo220 took place on a field near present-
day Pristina, on June 15, 1389, between the army led by the Serbian prince Lazar Hrebeljanović 
and the Ottoman forces led by the Sultan Murad. At that time, Lazar was just beginning to meet 
some success in his attempts to stabilize the fragmented and mutually quarrelling Serbian lands 
and to bid the position of the sovereign. Previously, the Serbian medieval state had gone through 
almost two centuries of progress and expansion under the Nemanjić dynasty, reaching its apogee 
under Stefan Dušan, crowned emperor in 1346. The decline was soon to follow however, and the 
last Nemanjić, Dušan’s son Uroš, died in 1371. In the same year, the advancing Ottomans 
marked their first important victory against the Serbs. 
                                                 
218 In terms of  O’Brien’s (1987: 9-13) theory of “holy nations”, distinguishing the Old Testament version (concrete 
and localized) from the New Testament version (spiritual and other-worldly), the Serbian case oscillates between the 
two. It began as the latter and slid into the former in 19th -turn of 20th century, yet occasionally reverting to the “New 
Testament” variety in calmer periods, while the last three decades have seen a powerful revival of the “Old 
Testament” kind.  
219 The oldest and first recorded folk epics were 14- or 16-syllabic bugarštice, but what would become canonical is 
the decasyllabic type (deseterac), usually sung with the accompaniment of gusle (a simple string instrument played 
with a bow). In spite of their aura of the only genuine representative of the folk tradition about Kosovo, poems of the 
latter kind were composed no earlier than mid-18th century (Emmert 1990: 122; Loma 2002: 130). Other, less 
consequential genres of folklore on Kosovo themes – tales, proverbs, toponyms and popular genealogies – also exist. 
220 See Emmert (1990) for a detailed account of the historical event and the legend. 

 

230

Like all medieval battles, Kosovo was, strictly speaking, not fought by “Serbs” and 

“Turks” in national or ethnic terms, although it was redefined as such in retrospect. Its religious 
component was important though: it was felt on both sides to be a clash between Christians and 
Muslims. The Battle’s immediate outcome is not clear,221 but with the passage of time it was 
increasingly presented as Serbian and Christian defeat, on which basis the Kosovo Myth would 
be built. This was a retrospective interpretation of a military event which, however undecided 
initially, represented an important step in the loss of Serbia’s statehood and independence to the 
Ottomans.222 Although Serbian lands retained a degree of autonomy until 1459, and actually 
experienced some cultural flourishing, Lazar’s widow was forced to accept vassalage to Turks 
and other feudal lords were under mounting Ottoman pressure.223  
 
Whether Kosovo was “really” Serbian military defeat or not is actually not crucial. The 
cultural construction of Trauma congealed around the factual core of a battle and death of the 
ruler. The social context was favorable for a traumatic definition of the event. Under Ottoman 
rule, the previously initiated economic, political and cultural development was cut short. Social 
structure changed: native nobility disappeared, previous political institutions were dissolved, 
Serbian Church lost its privileged role, a new ruling group of a different faith was introduced. 
Serbs’ ties to Western Europe were severed. The population homogenized into peasantry 
underwent what ethnologists have called “secondary patriarchalization” - reverting to ancient, 
often pre-Christian forms of social organization, economy and morality. Although one would do 
well not to perpetuate Serbian textbook stereotypes on the “five hundreds of Turkish yoke”, a 
frozen time of utter darkness and misfortune, there are enough grounds to argue that for Serbs 
the Ottoman conquest meant a rupture, a sudden redirection of historical course. The Kosovo 
legend emerged as part of the collective effort to make sense of this rupture and a retrospective 
explanation of its roots and causes. 

 The legend would take its final shape only in 18th century.224 In this long first period, 
several types of carrier groups may be identified that were articulating, recording, interpreting 
and spreading what would become the Serbian Trauma of Kosovo. At the very beginning of the 
process stood the mutually overlapping circles of Serbian aristocracy and the Orthodox Church, 
who first established the cult of Prince Lazar. Later carriers of the tale were innumerable 
anonymous folk singers who were telling and retelling the story of Kosovo heroes in their 
creations/performances.225 They did not necessarily intend to transmit Trauma: their main 
concern was to tell a good story well, to entertain their audiences and at once provide them with 
a morally uplifting lesson of warrior virtues, in accordance with the patriarchal ethos. Further, 
there were Catholic travelers, monks, educators and emissaries, from the Balkans or Western 
Europe, who often found it in their own interest to spread the Myth. And finally, often left out of 
                                                 
221 The earliest sources, both Serbian and Turkish, either just describe a bloody battle in which both commanders 
died, or call it a Christian victory. 
222 The possibility of a Serbian victory is actually irrelevant because the idea of Kosovo as defeat, tragedy, and 
drama “is so deeply engraved in the consciousness of both ordinary people and professional historians that it has 
become ... part of our thinking and values we have adopted” (Blagojević 1990: 14-5). 
223 Ottoman rule in central Serbia would last until early 19th century, and in Kosovo until 1912. 
224 This final shape, which we know today, appeared for the first time in two compilations originating at two remote 
points in the Serb-populated territories, both of them outside of Serbia proper: epic drama The Battle of Kosovo was 
created in the Bay of Kotor (present-day Montenegro); and the prose work The Tale about the Battle of Kosovo in 
the Austrian province of Srem (present-day Vojvodina, across the river Sava from central Serbia) (Emmert 1990: 
123; Popović 1998: 60-68). The authorship and mutual influences of the two works remain moot. 
225 On the specific logic of epic singing, and the notions of formulae, creativity and originality in this context, see 
the superb study of Albert Lord (1964). 

 

231

conventional accounts in spite of their importance, were the Serbian educated middle classes in 
the border regions of the Habsburg Empire, arising since the late 17th century after successive 
waves of Serb migration from Ottoman-held territories. As to the specification of the “nature of 
the victim”, it was not quite clear who they were, and hence should feel “interpellated” by the 
traumatic narrative – Serbs, Orthodox Serbs, Christians?, nor did it have to be made clear, given 
the cultural assumptions of the times. This initial ambivalence would prove useful in later stages. 

Elements of the legend. The legend is organized around two foci, personified in two 

towering figures: Prince Lazar and Miloš Obilić. One focus is religious, Christian, and martyrial, 
and the other epic and heroic.226 They are complemented by the “traitor” Vuk Branković. There 
is a host of accompanying characters – the knight Jug Bogdan and his nine sons, the Jugović 
brothers, all killed in the battle; their mother, who died of sorrow; the Maiden of Kosovo, a girl 
who lost her fiance; as well as an array of lesser knights and nobles. Almost all of them are 
fictitious, but very much alive in the conventional reception of the myth.227  

Prince Lazar. The cult of Prince Lazar was the embryo of the emerging Kosovo myth. 

Proclaimed a saint shortly after the Battle, from 1390 on Lazar was celebrated every June 15 
along with the Prophet Amos (the saint to whom the day is dedicated in the liturgical calendar), 
with a special Office to the Saint Prince Lazar composed to that purpose. While several members 
of the Nemanjić dynasty had been proclaimed saints, these earlier saintly rulers were celebrated 
for having lived in deep devotion to the Christian faith, and not for dying for it (Popović 1998: 
23-4). Lazar was the first to be commemorated both as a believer and a martyr, who through 
deliberately embracing death earned the entrance to eternal life.   

Lazar’s martyrdom is based on the fact that he gave his life “in defense of the holy 

cross”. The early religious writings are responsible for presenting Lazar’s death as the result of a 
choice on his part: he consciously opted to die in order to redeem himself, his people and his 
faith. By modeling Lazar’s character closely on the figure of Jesus Christ, the church writings 
also introduced the theme of reversal of the Battle’s outcome. What was a defeat in this-worldly 
terms becomes a triumph on a higher, spiritual level; what looked like a terrible loss is recoded 
as willing self-sacrifice in order to attain eternal, spiritual and therefore, in devout Christian eyes, 
the only true victory. In a medieval eulogy, Lazar is described as addressing his knights on the 
eve of the battle, calling them into an honorable death as the price for salvation.228 The phrases 
employed belong to the rhetoric of the period, and the worldview they express is also 
recognizably medieval. We do not know if Lazar really said this to his soldiers; but even if he 
did, it would not make him very different from countless Christian warriors of the period.229 
The folk tradition elaborated this symbolic baseline laid out by the Church, placing 

Lazar’s martyrdom in a compelling narrative which it fleshed out with many details. On the eve 
                                                 
226 Some commentators add also: pagan (Loma, 2002; Popović, 1998). 
227 It can hardly be said that they live on just in the “popular” understanding, since in every Serbian city and town 
there are streets bearing the names of these characters, which makes them quite “official”. 
228 “If the sword, if wounds, or if the darkness of death comes to us, we accept it sweetly for Christ and for the 
godliness of our homeland. It is better to die in battle than to live in shame. Better it is for us to accept death from 
the sword in battle than to offer our shoulders to the enemy. We have lived a long time for the world; in the end we 
seek to accept the martyr’s struggle and to live forever in the heaven.” And his soldiers respond: “We die so that we 
may live forever” (Patriarch Danilo, “Narrative about Prince Lazar”, quoted in Emmert 1990: 63, 64). 
229 And not just Christian, for that matter: Ottoman sources glorify the Sultan in almost identical terms, Islamic 
version, as a martyr for the faith. How the Battle of Kosovo was portrayed at both sides of the battlefield as a 
“cosmic” battle and a pledge for eternal glory and salvation, is discussed in Bakić-Hayden 2004: 35-38; Emmert 
1990: 88-98; Popović 1998: 24-30. 

 

232

of the battle, the poem says, Lazar received a message from the Holy Virgin, transmitted by St. 
Elijah in the guise of a falcon, to choose between an earthly kingdom, that would bring him 
victory and the battle, and a heavenly one, for which he would have to die together with all of his 
men. Lazar chooses the latter, erects, as ordered, a church on the Kosovo Field, takes holy 
communion with his soldiers, and marches to death. This – Lazar’s choice of death as 
redemption – would become known as the “Kosovo covenant” or “Kosovo pledge”. The parallel 
between Lazar and Christ is particularly accentuated in the tale of the “Prince’s Supper”, which 
is only found in the folk tradition and is modeled as a replica of the Last Supper. 

When the early Christian sources talk of Lazar’s victory rather than defeat, it is always 

described in terms of “light”, which indicates the notion’s otherworldly, spiritual meaning. 
Besides, popular lore includes legends about his miraculous body. Lazar is here identified as the 
embodied symbol of the community, of Serbs’ “corporate identity” (Bakić-Hayden 2004: 39) 
which, in the centuries after the battle, was under pressure to survive both in a physical sense and 
in the sense of preserving their religiously based communal identity.230 The influence of 
medieval notions of the “king’s two bodies” (Kantorowicz 1957) is obvious, where the spiritual 
body of the leader is joined with the corpus of his knights, or “the whole people”, in a sacralized 
sacrifice for the eternal life of the community and the Christian faith (Bojović 1991).231  

Miloš Obilić is a brave soldier and Lazar’s son-in-law who at the supper before the 
Battle was unjustly accused of imminent treason. Faced with Lazar’s mistrust, he decided to 
prove his loyalty by killing Murad. The next day during the fighting he went on his own to the 
Turkish camp, entered by pretending to be a deserter, and killed the Sultan, only to be killed 
himself. 

Miloš Obilić is not a historical personality. How, where and when he appeared as a 
fictional character is still debated. Some scholars (Popović 1998: 29-42) suggest that Miloš 
originated in the Turkish sources, invented by Ottoman writers in order to cover and justify the 
embarrassing fact of Sultan’s death; Serbs then took over this character of villain-assassin and 
turned him into a hero. Yet others (e.g. Loma 2002) argue that Serbian sources too knew of a 
knight who killed Murad,232 but that everything else, including his name, was legendary. 
Whenever Serbs’ relations with the Turkish authorities worsened, as in rebellions and wars, 
Miloš’s figure became salient, and finally topped all others on the eve of the First Serbian 
Uprising of 1804.  

Furthermore, Catholic Slavs of the Western Balkans played a role in the shaping and 

spreading of the cult of Miloš. The neighboring Catholic states, exposed to the threat of Turkish 
invasion, were promoting anti-Ottoman and anti-Muslim sentiments, to which purpose the figure 
of Miloš was ideally suited (Popović 1998: 43-70). In addition, after 15th century considerable 
numbers of Serbs fleeing from Serbia settled in the border regions, employed as frontier soldiers 
of Austria and Venice. They lived in a highly patriarchal and militarized cultural milieu, where 
the epic tradition was thriving. Miloš, the most epic of all Kosovo heroes, was thus prominent 
                                                 
230 “[Lazar’s] body incorporates the nation itself, his head the spirit of the people. Miraculously... neither rotted for 
forty years, just as the Serbian people have not ‘decayed’ into the customs and faith of their Islamic rulers” (Bakić-
Hayden 2004: 39). 
231 Although in the Middle Ages, writes Kantorowicz (1957: 261) every soldier giving his life for the community 
becomes a martyr in the image of Christ, the king’s death holds a special significance: “The sacrifice of the Prince 
for his corpus mysticum – the secular state – compared with the sacrifice of Christ more directly ...: both offered 
their lives not only as members but also as the heads of their mystical bodies.”  
232 Military historians argue that the feat was more probably accomplished by an armored unit. Capturing or killing 
the enemy chief commander was a major element of medieval war tactics (Blagojević 1989: 20). 

 

233

among both Catholics and the Orthodox in the Western Balkans. Finally, a major source of the 
narrative substance of the Kosovo myth, from which oral tradition subsequently borrowed, was 
the semi-legendary history of Slavic peoples (Il Regno degli Slavi, 1601) by Mavro Orbin, a 
monk from the Republic of Dubrovnik. It is in Orbin’s work that the complete story of Miloš and 
his exploit was rendered for the first time.  

Nowadays, Miloš is undoubtedly the central character of the Kosovo Myth. Although he 
never existed, most Serbs are convinced he did. His name is metaphorical shorthand for selfless 
heroism and fearlessness; the saying, “to have the heart of Obilić” means honorable courage and 
ability to withstand the greatest challenge. His figure is in present times the epitome of 
Serbhood, especially of its militant, warrior variant. It is a curious paradox then that this very 
personification of Serbianness should be a literary figure which among all the Kosovo characters 
was most directly derived from Serbs’ political and cultural exchange with others – and those 
others most often seen as Serbs’ enemies, that is, Muslim Turks and Catholic Croats and 
Slovenes.  

Vuk Branković illustrates yet third possibility of the relation between “fact” and 

None of this helped him to escape his literary fate. It is as if the narrative of heroic 

“fiction”: he really existed, but was not at all what the legend tells of him. In the story, he is the 
traitor who, having first slandered Miloš to Lazar to divert the latter’s attention from his own evil 
designs, betrayed Lazar, gave up fighting in Kosovo and went over to the Turks. Historically, 
Vuk Branković was the second greatest Serbian feudal lord, Lazar’s son in law and master of the 
very land where the Battle was fought. He was not a traitor at all but, on the contrary, continued 
resisting the Ottomans even after Lazar’s family agreed to surrender. He died in Turkish prison.  
 
martyrdom of Lazar and his knights could not do without a traitor: such a figure was demanded, 
one might say, by the constraints of the genre. How Vuk Branković got into the role in the first 
place is not entirely clear,233 but probably has to do with the fact that he refused to obey the 
Lazarević family and follow their political line. The enmity between the two families continued 
for some time after the Battle and it was at the Lazarević court that the first allusions to Vuk’s 
disloyalty were produced (Ljubinković 1989: 150-152; Mihaljčić 1990, Emmert 1990: 105-120). 
And once the motif of treason got into the legend, it could not leave it, because it was nurtured 
both by instrumental factors of political interests and by cultural factors of narrative coherence 
and familiarity. If Lazar was Jesus Christ, someone had to be Judas. The Biblical cliche of the 
“Judas motif” was found in many Christian legends, especially in the Middle Ages (Mihaljčić 
1990: 29). And for the more heroic, epic reading of the legend, if two characters were positive, 
the story would lack sufficient dramatic intensity and thus would be implausible without a 
negative one. Both virtue and vice must have a face in order to be sufficiently alive for the 
vernacular cultural consumer.  

As could be seen, all the early formative drives that helped shape the Kosovo Myth were 

not specifically Serbian but rather partook of the cultural dynamics of the times. Christian 
hagiography, which served as the first discursive form to establish the cult of Prince Lazar, was a 
major genre of medieval literature; and the practice of canonizing and religiously celebrating 
political leaders, preserving and displaying their holy relics were all common in European 
Christendom (see also Ćirković 1990: 112). Further, the Kosovo folk poems belong to the genre 
of heroic epic widespread in Europe of the early Middle Ages – the only difference being that 
Serbs, due to “secondary patriarchalization”, continued singing them long after the Western 
                                                 
233 The first attested source that names him as the traitor is Orbin’s History. We do not know, and never will, if the 
unrecorded oral tradition preceding Orbin cast Vuk Branković in that role or not. 

 

234

counterparts sank into oblivion. Even specific motifs are shared: the slandered knight, accused 
by his master of betrayal, who decides to prove his allegiance by a great deed, is found also in 
the legends of Roland or Tristan and Isolde (Ljubinković 1989: 154; Loma, 2002). Hence from 
the very beginning the Kosovo legend was a way of Serbs’ participation in the cultural traffic 
with the rest of the world rather than a path leading to isolation and exclusivity.    
 
2. Serbian modernity: 19th century 

The dominant twin accounts presented at the beginning of this chapter cast the Kosovo 

Myth as the prime sign of Serbs’ irreparable pre-modernity and anti-modernity. Nevertheless, the 
Myth as we know it was formed only in the 19th century, at the time when Serbia was struggling 
to get (back) into the history of European nations. And this was necessarily a modern struggle, 
which made use of modern ideas and modern ways of pursuing them.  

The Kosovo legacy lived into the late 18th century as a collection of interrelated and 

symbolically relatively coherent bits and pieces. In Bakić-Hayden’s (2004: 31) apt phrase, it was 
the First Serbian Uprising that “tied into the knot of collective awareness many loose strands of a 
long epic memory”. In the decades immediately preceding the 1804 Uprising the cult of Kosovo 
was more widely spread and alive than ever before. As previously noted, its main centers were 
not in Serbia proper (which of course is not to say it was unknown there) but in the Montenegrin 
highlands, and among Serbs in the Habsburg Empire, whose entrepreneurial middle classes were 
the only modern, educated stratum of Serbs at the time. They were crucial inspirers of the Myth’s 
first direct political use. And in spite of their modernity, they preserved the epic singing tradition 
they had brought with them on their migrations, so it was in Srem that some of the key folk 
poems about Kosovo were written down at the turn of the 19th century (1998: 147-150).234 

The beginning of 19th century was decisive for both the Serbian nation and the Kosovo 
Myth. Politically, modern Serbia took its first steps, through the First (1804-1813) and Second 
(1815) uprisings against Ottoman rule, in a long process of acquiring independence that would 
be finished only in 1878. Culturally – which in this case means also politically – the crucial 
move in articulating and fixing the oral folk tradition was made by the ethnographer and 
language reformer Vuk Karadžić. He wrote down, compiled and published Serbian folk poems, 
dividing them into several “cycles”, the central one being “the Kosovo cycle”.235 And, 
intentionally or not, “Vuk’s work posited the Kosovo tradition as being the heart of his people’s 
life, perceiving it, in the light of the current Western and Central European Zeitgeist, as a living 
expression of their ‘national spirit’” (Bakić-Hayden 2004: 31). From the very beginning, the 
nation-builders felt that the Kosovo legacy can be used for political mobilization for the purposes 
at hand. “By the late 18th century as the spirit of revolution found an echo in the Balkans, Serbs 
were ready to utilize the powerful psychological factor of Kosovo in the struggle for liberation 
and unification” (Emmert 1990: 123). The Kosovo story had all the features Smith (1997: 56-59) 
lists as criteria for a “usable past”, i.e. one that can help form nations: “authenticity”, inspiration, 
and capacity for reinterpretation. The Kosovo theme was used already in the preparations for the 
rebellion.236 At the outbreak of the Uprising, the leader himself, Karadjordje – who would be 
                                                 
234 It is sociologically extremely interesting that a few of these key poems were at least to a degree the authorial 
creations of specific individuals, the well-known singers of the time who told them to Karadžić. It was only after 
being published that they were canonized as the stereotypical “expression of the anonymous folk genius”.  
235 Himself a participant in the First Uprising, after its defeat he was forced to flee to Austria. His first collection of 
Serbian folk poems was published in Vienna in 1814, and several more followed. 
236 At a secret meeting an insurgent priest reportedly said: „Brothers! It has been so many hundreds of years since all 
our glory was buried in the dark and for all of us sad tomb at Kosovo...“ (quoted in Antonijević 2007a: 135). 

 

235

remembered as the „avenger of Kosovo“ – is said to have called „every Serb to arms, so that we 
may take revenge on the Turks, and in the name of God cast off the yoke that the Serb has 
carried since Kosovo to this day“ (quoted in Antonijević 2007a: 142). The epic tradition could be 
used to perceive and understand new situations and new tasks through the familiar images and 
concepts, and thus to collectively appropriate them more easily (Bakić-Hayden 2004: 36)  
While Obilić’s heroism and Lazar’s sacrifice could incite peasant masses to join the 

struggle that was at once a war of independence and a social revolution, the folklore collected by 
Vuk Karadžić was an invaluable political asset in winning outside support for the national 
cause.237 This was the time of the romanticist craze for “authentic” folk culture, and Serbian 
poems were warmly received and praised by some of the great intellectual figures of the day. 
Karadžić understood it very well that his undertaking is not just cultural but rather a national-
political one, since the admiration for Serbian culture in the powerful Western Europe would 
help secure a more favorable stance towards Serbian political aspirations, and on the other hand, 
the proof of “antiquity” of national traditions would support Serbian claims to nationhood. 
Serbian leaders felt what the spirit of the times was, and spoke its language. It is one of the many 
paradoxes around the Kosovo Myth, nowadays used to mark the radical alterity of Serbs, that its 
final form was fruit of the Serbian desire to construct a modern national culture that will be part 
of the Western world (cf. Bakić-Hayden 2004: 32). 

Around the middle of the century, as Serbia was gradually winning more sovereignty and 

building a new nation-state, some other important events took place. The adoption of Vuk 
Karadžić’s reformed orthography and grammar supplied Serbs with a standard language they had 
never had. The Montenegrin poet-ruler Petar Petrović Njegoš published his epic poem Mountain 
Wreath which, though written by an individual, in its poetics and its ethics followed closely the 
world of the patriarchal folk poetry, and did for the popularization of the Kosovo themes more 
than any other work. In Serbia, new, bourgeois strata were slowly emerging. The state 
encouraged and supported education abroad, and at home as well public education was 
established in order to raise the abysmally low literacy rate. The Karadžić collections of folk 
songs immediately became part of the curriculum, and the importance of the educational system 
in inculcating the Kosovo legacy in subsequent generations can hardly be overestimated. 

The ideas of European liberal and national revolutions of 1848 resonated strongly among 

Serbian youth, especially students, both in Serbia proper and in the Habsburg lands. One of the 
offshoots was literary romanticism of the 1850s and 1860s. This cultural-political movement was 
particularly passionate in reviving the Kosovo Myth, centered, in their understanding, on 
heroism and self-sacrifice for the nation. Student societies, clubs and associations idolized the 
Kosovo heroes and emulated the folk singer in the poetry they themselves wrote.238  

In light of the current easy identifications of the Kosovo Myth with conservatism, Serbian 

chauvinism, and Orthodox clericalism it is important to situate this first outburst of Kosovo 
idolatry back into its cultural and political context. This reminds us of the broader spate of 
interpretational possibilities inherent in the Myth’s contents. The radical Serbian youth were the 
children of their times: they were nationalist, but also democrats and modernists, as well as, in 
their own way, cosmopolitans. They maintained close contacts, both ideological and personal, 
                                                 
237 As Skerlić writes, with a touch of sarcasm: “Folk poetry ... was, after all, the only thing the Serbian people could 
present to the world” (Skerlić 1925: 256). 
238 The Battle of Kosovo was the Leit-motiv of Serbian poetry of the 1860s, with literary magazines swarmed by 
poems entitled Kosovo, At Kosovo, Oh Kosovo, full of wailings such as “Kosovo – my bloody wound!”,  “Woe 
Kosovo!” etc. (Skerlić 1925: 155). 

 

236

with democratic revolutionaries in other parts of Europe – Italy, France, and Hungary. They 
wanted their people to join the family of free European peoples, and the Kosovo legacy was seen 
not as an obstacle but a support on that road. Each free and sovereign people had to have 
something peculiar, something purely its own, and Kosovo was felt to be this Serbian specificity 
and Serbian gift to the colorfulness of the world – just the way Herder understood national 
cultures and their respectful coexistence.  

Although the Kosovo symbolism was certainly most strongly bound with Serbian 

nationalism, this did not preclude pan-Slavic and proto-Yugoslav connections. Interestingly, pan-
Slavism, the ideology of cultural and possibly political unity of all Slavic peoples, did not arrive 
in Serbia, as might be expected, from Russia but from the Slavic circles in Central and Western 
Europe (Skerlić 1925: 140).239 While in contemporary Serbia attachment to Kosovo is 
automatically associated with attachment to Russia as Serbs’ “older brother” and natural ally, in 
the period we are talking about this was not at all so straightforward. Playing the pan-Slavic card 
was rather connected with political cooperation with the Slavic peoples of the Habsburg Empire. 
Among the Southern Slavs, many young Croatian nationalists, wishing to see the liberation of 
their people from Austrian and Hungarian dominance, found the Kosovo legend to be speaking 
to them, too. For many of them, Kosovo could be read as a symbol of South Slavic (“Illyrian” as 
it was called), not just Serbian, national pride and promise of future liberation.240  

Finally, Serbian nationalist youth was also liberal in questions of internal policy and for 

this reason was often in conflict with authoritarian Serbian governments. Contrary to the 
impression conveyed in many present-day accounts, it is not true that all Serbian elites – from 
princes and their ministers, to writers and poets, to Orthodox priests – maintained a single and 
unified front of expansionist Serbian nationalism, whose watchword was “Kosovo”. In reality, 
nationalist authorities often harassed and imprisoned nationalist youthful activists who, along 
with “avenging Kosovo”, asked for freedom of the press and constitutional checks on the power 
of the prince. In the mind of these young people, “external freedom” (national independence) did 
not make much sense if it was not coupled with “internal freedom” (democracy and rule of 
law).241 Those who wrote most enthusiastic poems about the “bleeding sore” of Kosovo were 
also the ones who wrote the first liberal political programs, and suffered for that.  

It is equally misleading to forget about the specific position and interests of the Serbian 

Orthodox Church as a social agent. Without any doubt, the Church was in this period very 
patriotic and very much politically involved. But this does not mean it did not have its own views 
of what Kosovo legacy was and how it should properly be used. For one, it did not readily assent 
to the thorough secularization and nationalization of the Myth. A good example is the history of 
Vidovdan, the name given in the folk poetry to the day of the Battle. Although this term is 
                                                 
239 The most important figures are the Slovaks Ljudevit Štur and Jan Kolar, teachers at Austro-Hungarian colleges, 
as well as the famous Pole Adam Mickiewicz, whose course on Slavic folk traditions held at Collège de France in 
Paris the 1840s did much to popularize Serbian folk poetry in the West. 
240 Patriotic Croatian authors of today, anxious to expose the chauvinistic import of the Kosovo Myth, wisely omit 
such historical details as that students of the Zagreb Catholic seminary commemorated the Battle in 1840 (Skerlić 
1925: 164); that in 1889 in Vienna celebrations of the 500th anniversary were jointly organized by Serb and Croat 
academic societies, and that the most famous Croatian actor of the day traveled to Belgrade to play Prince Lazar in 
the premiere of a play commissioned for the anniversary (Emmert 1990: 130, 208). The Croatian Romanticist 
painter Franjo Kikerez used to depict mythologized scenes from the history (or “history”) of both peoples with the 
same enthusiasm: his ‘Croatia’ embodied as the tragic defender of Western Christendom against Islam (Žanić 1998) 
is equally pathetic as his “Maiden of Kosovo” (Popovich 1991). 
241 The formula was coined by Jevrem Grujić, member of the fervently nationalist Association of Serbian Youth and 
writer of the first liberal manifesto in Serbia, persecuted and imprisoned for his liberal beliefs. 

 

237

 

hen 

e 

  

nowadays virtually synonymous with “Kosovo”, it was resisted by the Church for a quite long 
time. The term is the Serbianized form for “St.Vitus day”, but refers basically to the secular 
commemoration of the Battle’s anniversaries. As has been said, the Serbian Church dedicated 
June 15 (28)242 to Amos and Lazar; Vitus is not a saint recognized by the Orthodox. For the 
more secularized nationalist audience, Vidovdan did not have much to do with St.Vitus either – it
243– but rather 
was just a welcome coincidence that June 15 was his day in the Catholic calendar
with celebrating the nation itself, through celebrating the Kosovo heroes. To make the 
celebration more solemn, they wanted Vidovdan to be the national and church holiday, but t
Church refused to include it in its official calendar until as late as 1892. The Church also 
opposed the fervor with which young poets venerated and all but sacralized secular national 
figures such as Vuk Karadžić and Dositej Obradović. For the Church, this was blasphemy. W
the young Romanticists openly identified the “Golgotha” of Kosovo with Jesus’ Golgotha, this 
provoked severe criticism from the religious circles. In the bitter polemics taking place in th
f 
1860s, Church writers expressed their abhorrence of what they saw was pervasive heathenism o
folk poetry and the literature inspired by it (Skerlić 1925: 256).244

The 500th anniversary of the Battle of Kosovo was the first to be commemorated in an 

he 

An extremely important circumstance in the second half of 19th century was that the 

independent (“resurrected”) Serbian state, and provided the occasion for several important 
events. First, around this date the first professional historical studies of the Kosovo battle were 
made public, by the two founders of Serbian critical historiography, Ilarion Ruvarac and 
Ljubomir Kovačević. Ruvarac sifted what had been accepted as the historical record of the Battle 
of Kosovo and rejected most of it as product of poetic imagination or political fabrication; 
Kovačević demonstrated that Vuk Branković was not a traitor. Yet from our present-day 
viewpoint, what is equally if not more intriguing as their uncompromising critical and rationalist 
attitude is the fact that it stood side by side with their nationalism. Their motive in exposing 
myths as myths, which caused them much trouble amongst their myth-loving contemporaries, 
was in no way to spoil the collective image. Quite the opposite: they believed that by rectifying 
obvious untruths they were helping Serbian glory shine even brighter. Nowadays this ideological 
combination would look curious indeed.   
 
territory of real Kosovo was still in Ottoman hands. Thus in this period the appeals to the 
symbolic Kosovo as an abstract Trauma and spiritual pledge was easily, and deliberately, 
conflated with a simple call to arms, a battle cry to “avenge” and “liberate” Kosovo, and finally 
“settle the accounts” with the Turks. But just at this same time, and in Kosovo, Albanians were 
creating their own national movement.245 Like never before, Serbian and Albanian collective 
aspirations began to diverge and conflict. It is from this period that the Albanian-Serbian rivalry 
over Kosovo dates. Open conflicts and mutual victimization of Serbs and Albanians began to 
feed back into the already existing traumatizing framework of the Serbian Kosovo narrative. 
Kosovo symbolism was significantly re-territorialized. And increasingly, the enemies to be 
                                                
242 The Serbian Church uses the Julian calendar which is 13 days apart from the Gregorian, so that anniversaries of 
the Battle are nowadays celebrated on June 28. 
243 Given the possibly significant role Dubrovnik played in molding and spreading the Kosovo Myth, it may also be 
relevant that St.Vitus is the city’s patron saint. Popović however explains Vidovdan as a barely Christianized pagan 
holiday, based on the cult of Vid, the ancient Slavic god of light (1998: 71-87).  
244 It is helpful to remember such details today, when the Serbian Church seems to be, to say the least, much more 
tolerant to sacralization of the nation. 
245 For Albanian political development in this period see Vickers 1998, Malcolm 1998; a Serbian view is presented 
in Bogdanović 2006. 

 

 

238

fought “in the manner of Lazar and Miloš” were identified as Albanians rather than Turks. Yet 
the use of Kosovo as a political slogan was not uniform: the state, by definition, had to be much 
more cautious and take into account foreign policy and other concerns that the cultural elites 
could afford to ignore.246  

So Kosovo symbolism served somewhat different purposes for different actors: the 

government sought to turn a standardized, regularized version of the tradition into the 
institutionalized founding myth of the nation-state and dynastic rule; the cultural elites often used 
Kosovo to confront the government and attack its policies as inappropriate, both in internal and 
international arenas; moreover, within the elites themselves, the first criticisms arose of what was 
perceived as political abuse and unhealthy exaggeration of the Kosovo myth;247 and finally, the 
Church, by defending the more traditional receptions of Kosovo, tried to reassert its position in 
the rapidly changing environment.   
Thus while the first stage leading up to the late 18th century provided elements of the 
 
myth, this second stage rounded it off, completed its construction as a cultural structure: the 
narrative was there, the main characters were presented in relief, and the presumed centrality of 
the Myth for Serbs as a nation was slowly being impressed, through the educational system, 
upon everybody. This is what the 19th century bequeathed to the forthcoming generations. But 
what it also bequeathed was Kosovo’s fundamental ambiguity: what was its “true” message; 
what was the proper way of preserving it; what should Serbs do about the trauma inflicted in 
1389 – is there, in fact, any trauma at all? The 19th century was the first time when different 
social actors, pursuing various and often conflicting goals, reached for Kosovo as an inspiration, 
a call to arms, a spiritual reminder, an emotional bond with their fellows, or a scourge to chastise 
them. This multi-dimensionality and pragmatic versatility of Kosovo would remain its basic, 
though largely unacknowledged feature. 
 
3. An “integralist” Kosovo: the interwar period 
Real Kosovo was finally liberated - or occupied, depending on the perspective one takes - in the 
Balkan wars of 1912-13. After World War I, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (from 
1929 Kingdom of Yugoslavia) was created, bringing together the formerly independent states of 
Serbia and Montenegro and territories previously held by Austria-Hungary (Croatia, Slovenia, 
Bosnia, Herzegovina). The country was ruled by the Serbian dynasty Karadjordjević. King 
Aleksandar “the Unifier” felt it necessary to develop an ideological underpinning to his rule over 
the newly united South Slavs. He launched the ambitious cultural-policy project of “integral 
Yugoslavism”, based on the idea that Serbs, Croats and Slovenes are one and a single people, 
divided in three “tribes”. He took over from the former Serbian state the Kosovo legend in the 
function of founding myth but sought to “Yugoslavize” it. Thus the Kosovo theme figured 
prominently in many of the manifestation of this political-cultural outlook, which was officially 
dominant in the 1920s and much of the 1930s, and was often forcefully imposed along with other 
King’s policies (in 1929 the regime turned into a dictatorship). Upon Aleksandar’s assassination 
                                                 
246 The 500th anniversary celebrations, for instance, were carefully planned so as not to offend the Turks and spoil 
the relatively good diplomatic relations with the Ottoman state. 
247 The prominent playwright Jovan Sterija Popović, at first an ardent Kosovo promoter himself, in later years 
became disappointed by political instrumentalizations of the Myth and, in the foreword to his bitterly satirical play 
The Patriots (1848), warned Serbs that they would not make progress until they learned how to acknowledge their 
failings, not just their virtues (quoted in Antonijević 2007a: 89). 

 

239

in 1934, he was likened to Prince Lazar, for sacrificing himself to the unity of Yugoslavs 
(Emmert 1990: 138). 

Probably the most interesting form in which Kosovo served the ideology of dynastic 
Yugoslavism was through the then fashionable disciplines of ethnopsychology and national 
characterology. The importance of Kosovo for the “national soul” had already been stressed by 
the geographer Jovan Cvijić. In his typology of Serbian characters, Cvijić described as clearly 
superior the so-called Dinaric Highlander, whose warrior and state-building capacities he 
praised. The Highlander’s soul is centered on the memory of Kosovo and upholding of the 
Kosovo covenant.248 While for Cvijić Kosovo concerned Serbs alone, in the works of a major 
exponent of the integral Yugoslavism, Vladimir Dvorniković, it became Yugoslav. An ethnic 
Croat, Dvorniković deeply believed in the idea of the fundamental unity of South Slavs. For him, 
folk epics, especially the central Kosovo Cycle, is the true expression of the “people’s psyche”, 
the essence of the Yugoslav soul. In these poems, we hear “the voice of a people which is 
becoming a nation and which feels its state-building and Christian-cultural mission in the 
Balkans” (Dvorniković 1939: 537). “Our epics” is “ethically higher” than that of other peoples 
since it represents a stance of “struggle, resistance and ultimate sacrifice”. Our people has a 
“powerful historical organ” and is endowed with “collective popular mnesis which hardly has an 
analog in any other European people” (ibid.). The exaggeration and collective conceit are 
remarkable indeed.  

Yugoslavism found expression in the visual arts as well. The best known Croatian and 

Yugoslav sculptor, and for a time the dynasty’s favorite artist, Ivan Meštrović, sought to embody 
the Kosovo Myth in marble and granite, so that its important messages, as he understood them, 
might permanently foster the unity of South Slavs. Meštrović produced the design for a 
spectacular memorial to be erected at Kosovo Field. The project was never realized however, 
only reliefs representing individual characters (Popovich 1991: 252). 

I certainly do not wish to claim that, in the interwar period, Kosovo suddenly stopped 

being Serbian and became a common heritage binding the South Slavs. After all, that King 
Aleksandar’s projects were not very successful was more than convincingly demonstrated first 
by his assassination by Croatian nationalists, and then in 1941 when, attacked by the Axis 
Powers, Yugoslavia fell apart in less than a week. But even if one concedes that it was all just 
plain Serbian dominance cloaked in a false Yugoslavism, it does make a difference whether the 
framing was more exclusive or more inclusive. It is culturally significant that an attempt was 
made in this direction, and that for at least some non-Serbs it made sense to see Kosovo as part 
of their own legacy and inspiration.249  
 
4. The communist twist: after 1945 
                                                 
248 “The Dinaric man burns from a desire to avenge Kosovo... where he lost his independence... From there stems 
the almost unlimited spirit of sacrifice... for social and national ideal” (Cvijić 1992: 34). [Every Highlander peasant] 
“considers the national heroes as his own ancestors: with profound national and human sensibility he participates in 
his thoughts in their great deeds. ... There are even regions in which the people feel the wounds of the Kosovo 
heroes” (p. 39-40). 
249 The non-Serb Yugoslav peoples could do more with Kosovo than accept, or reject, wholesale its dynastic version. 
In an article with the telling title “In defense of the real Vidovdan”, the newspaper of a Croatian political party 
comments on the occasion of the 550 anniversary in 1939, that to conceal Serbian hegemonic policies behind the 
ideology of Kosovo is to betray its very ideals, which consist of “ethics and love of justice”, and only when they 
start treating Croats in a fair and just way will Serbs become worthy of Vidovdan (quoted in Emmert 1990: 208). 

 

240

It is often argued today that in communist times, between 1945 and the late 1980s, the 

Kosovo legacy was suppressed and forcefully forgotten. But this is not quite true: though public 
celebrations of Vidovdan were banned, the communists knew how to incorporate Kosovo into 
their ideology and make good use of it. But before they came to power, the turbulent years of 
World War II intervened, extremely interesting for our topic. On March 27, 1941, the 
government which two days before had signed the Tripartite Pact with Nazi Germany was 
toppled in a coup backed, to put it mildly, by the British secret service. The putschists, the public 
figures250 and the public opinion in favor of the coup all explicitly referred to the Kosovo 
covenant as their guide, and interpreted the rejection of the agreement with the vastly more 
powerful Germany as a reenactment of Lazar’s choice of the heavenly kingdom. Street protesters 
carried placards with slogans “Better war than the Pact” and “Better grave than slave”. The 
graves were not long in waiting, as Belgrade was bombed on April 6. 

During the war, the Kosovo theme became one of the stakes in the intra-Serb strife 

between the communist-led Partisans, the forces loyal to the King and government in exile (the 
Chetniks), and the quisling government installed by the Germans. All sides used Kosovo as 
symbolic capital in fighting cultural battles that accompanied armed ones; all of them claimed 
monopoly over the message and values of Kosovo and strove to sully the opponents by 
identifying them with the treacherous Vuk Branković. The collaborationist government used 
Kosovo rhetoric to denigrate the Partisans, throwing Lazar’s curse against them (see e.g. Emmert 
1990: 140). On the other hand, the Communist Party also liberally exploited Kosovo symbolism. 
In the flyer they distributed in July 1941, calling Serbs to join the resistance they were leading, 
the communists also used Lazar’s curse (Ćosić 2004: 157). In mobilizing people in villages they 
often employed folk rhetoric and lines from the epic poems. They sought to establish a direct 
link between the Kosovo heroes and themselves, as the new resisters to foreign occupation. But 
the Chetniks used the same language and imagery, and which side would win a village over often 
did not depend on whose speaker was more convincing (Žanić 1998: 63).251 

After the establishment of the communist regime, the Kosovo legacy was not wiped out. 

In a somewhat modified form, it remained an obligatory part of the school curricula. It was 
purged as much as possible of its religious content, and its Serbian character was played down. 
In spite of the profound hate of the communists for the Karadjordjević dynasty and all it stood 
for, their treatment of Kosovo was not totally dissimilar, at least in the intention to defuse its 
Serbianness and stress the (potential) Yugoslav commonality. Communists presented the Kosovo 
legend as part of the tradition of “our peoples”, which they took as the basis of their cultural 
legitimacy.252 Their cultural policy was basically populist: while officially claiming to have 
                                                 
250 Speaking on the Belgrade radio, the Patriarch of the Serbian Church said that the pact was a betrayal of the 
Kosovo ethic, reminded Serbs that Lazar had accepted his fate for the sake of Serbia, and that the current situation 
demanded the same sacrifice. “This morning at dawn the question [of the nation’s fate] received its answer. We 
chose the heavenly kingdom – the kingdom of truth, justice, national strength, and freedom” (quoted in Emmert 
1990: 140). 
251 It is worth noting here how selective the “denouncing” and “celebratory” discourses are in citing historical 
instances when Kosovo was invoked for political purposes. Both are glad to mention Gavrilo Princip’s assassination 
of the Habsburg heir to the throne Franz Ferdinand in 1914, since this may be seen as either terrorism or freedom 
fighting. But the denouncers never mention the 1941coup or the Partisans, because this was antifascist struggle and 
hence does not fit in the portrayal of the Myth as conducive to Serbs’ fascist behavior; Yugoslavia’s 1948 split with 
the Soviet Union is similarly unsuitable. Celebrators, on the other hand, tend to forget the Kosovo rhetoric of the 
quisling government. 
252 Being myself a pupil in Serbian schools in Titoist times, I remember we spent many hours studying the Kosovo 
poems and duly learned by heart large chunks of them. (That is how - by having learned the poems for homework - 

 

241

broken with all things past, they actually retained many features of the traditional folk ethos. 
Within this ethos they foregrounded its agonistic strand, pitting “us” (any of the Yugoslav 
peoples, or all of them together) against “them” (various foreign invaders, actual or possible). 
Analyses of textbooks from former Yugoslavia (e.g. Rosandić and Pešić eds. 1994; Žanić 1998: 
308-311) invariably point out that priority was granted to militaristic values, at the expense of the 
more peacetime, “soft” values of creativity, diligence, tolerance or intimacy. 
 
5. Milošević’s ‘Back to the future’ 
The decade of the 1980s was decisive for Kosovo both as a real place and as a symbol. The 
ethnic Albanian majority in the province increasingly demanded more autonomy, i.e. the status 
of a full-fledged republic within the Yugoslav federation.253 Political unrest was suppressed by 
force and no dialogue was opened. On the other hand, in this same period Kosovo Serbs began to 
complain they were being harassed by the Albanians and forced to move out. Hostility between 
the two peoples was growing rapidly and their political projects were becoming totally 
incompatible. The Serbian republic authorities however were not particularly receptive to 
Kosovo Serbs’ grievances, so these were taken up first by the Church254 and then by such 
institutions as the Association of Writers and the Academy of Sciences.255 This “unofficial 
nationalism”, increasingly at odds with the official line, made ample use of the discourse of 
trauma in depicting Serbian distant and recent history. It established a continuity of Serb 
suffering since 1389. It used the elements of the existing Kosovo legacy, in its most traumatic 
version possible, to make sense of contemporary developments; and vice versa, a traumatic 
interpretation of present-day events was used to reinforce a traumatic reading of the traditional 
Myth. It is in this atmosphere, and thanks to it, that Slobodan Milošević took power in 1987.256 
He aligned himself with the unofficial nationalism, but always retaining some rhetorical distance 
from it, as will be seen.  

Milošević was lucky enough to have the opportunity to celebrate the 600th anniversary of 
the Battle of Kosovo just at the moment he was at the height of his charisma. In his memorable 
speech delivered at the huge rally held at Gazimestan, the site of the Battle, on June 28, 1989 he 
was seemingly referring back to tradition, but in fact what he was saying was all about the plans 
he had for the future. He referred to the heroes of 1389 and their virtues, drawing direct parallels 
with the present. Earlier that year, Milošević had curtailed the autonomy of the Province of 
Kosovo by constitutional redesign, provoking Albanian protests whose violent suppression 
resulted in dozens of casualties. In the Gazimestan speech he presented this as a fulfillment of 
the Kosovo Covenant – not of course by explicitly boasting the dead the policy had produced, 
but by arguing that Serbia had reclaimed its dignity. 
                                                                                                                                                             
most Serbs become familiar with the characteristic topoi of the Kosovo legend, and not because they “have it in their 
blood”.) The Serbian character of the story and its heroes was made evident, but was not insisted upon. With the 
advent of Milošević, the substance of teaching Kosovo remained the same, but it was thoroughly Serbianized. 
253 After 1945, Kosovo was established as an autonomous province within the republic of Serbia. 
254 An “Appeal for the protection of Serb inhabitants and their holy places in Kosovo” signed by twenty one priests 
was issued in 1982. 
255 The actions of these three institutions during the 1980s and their political effects are analyzed in the appropriate 
chapters in Popov (ed.) 2000. For a more general overview of the Serbian intellectual opposition and its 
“nationalization” in the 1980s see Dragović-Soso 2002. 
256 A weird example of explicit traumatization for political purposes took place in 1988, when the remains of Prince 
Lazar were taken on a long journey through Serbian lands, being displayed, hailed and mourned in many towns and 
villages before arriving at the Gračanica monastery in Kosovo on the eve of the Battle’s 600th anniversary. The 
organizer was the Church, while the Milošević authorities benevolently condoned. 

 

242

Interestingly, Milošević’s recasting of the Kosovo narrative was much less traumatic than 

that of the cultural, unofficial nationalists. Actually, his 1989 speech comes closest we get to a 
“progressive narrative” of the Kosovo Trauma. It is full of optimism, problems solved, 
difficulties left behind, and new challenges bravely taken. But the irony is, while Milošević’s 
version of Kosovo Trauma was progressive on the surface, in reality it led to new traumas. His 
limitless arrogance, taken over and amplified by his followers, definitively antagonized 
Albanians and destroyed the last chances for a peaceful settlement. In the following years, the 
same happened with Serbs’ relations with other Yugoslav peoples. We may only speculate today, 
is it possible that Milošević really believed he had “resolved” the Kosovo problem and laid 
grounds for a Bright Future of Serbia “and all its citizens”, as he was fond of saying?  

But what was really Milošević’s central concern in this speech was to threaten the 

political opponents by invoking the treason of Vuk Branković and the “disunity” among Serbs as 
the “evil fate throughout their history”.257 Those who disagreed with his policies were identified 
with the legendary traitor. In this way the old epic tradition was used to legitimate the wholly 
communist practice of “differentiation”, i.e. purge of dissenters, and to underwrite a forced unity 
of mind and action. 
 
The political impact of the Kosovo Myth as used by Milošević in the late 1980s is usually 
judged simply as aggressive chauvinist mobilization. While of course this is basically correct, it 
is also important to remember that in that early period Milošević deliberately and skillfully 
mixed nationalism with socialism, or at least some kind of “welfare” rhetoric.258 And more 
generally, Milošević’s nationalism always came out packaged in somewhat civic and 
internationalist language. He never addressed his audiences as “Serbs” but always “citizens”; he 
never openly called for persecuting, let alone killing people of other nations; he was fond of 
praising “multiethnic coexistence” in Serbia. Although these rhetorical devices could be exposed 
as mere shams when compared to reality, they were not used in vain. Such ambiguities clearly 
enabled Milošević to enlist the support of many more and more diverse people than would 
otherwise be possible, because different constituencies could “read” differently his person, his 
political position, and his moves. And the masses gathering to hear Milošević at the staged-
“spontaneous” public rallies that marked the period were not just Serbs inebriated with 
nationalist frenzy and hate: they were also people deeply disappointed with the imploding real-
socialist system, desperately wishing for a change, and enjoying the feeling of new openings that 
Milošević had managed to create, deceptively but effectively, in the early years of his rule. He 
did not promise his followers the opportunity to slaughter Albanians, or anybody else – the 
aggression was unmistakably there, but usually implicit, and had to be read off from clues. What 
was promised explicitly was national rebirth, dignity, peace and prosperity. True, Milošević also 
promised to reclaim “our” Kosovo, but who exactly “we” were was not fully specified, nor were 
                                                 
257 Naumović (2008: 70-2, 173-4, 219-227) offers an excellent analysis. Antonijević (2007b: 127-8) shows the same 
ploy operating in other political speeches of the period.  
258 The editorial published on the very June 28, 1989 in the leading Belgrade daily Politika, Milošević’s chief media 
outlet, is revealing: “It is in Kosovo and around Kosovo that the destiny of Yugoslavia and the destiny of socialism 
are being determined. They want to take away from us the Serbian and the Yugoslav Kosovo, yes, they want to, but 
they will not be allowed to” (quoted in Zirojević 2000: 207, emphasis added). Mention of socialism in the same 
breath with Kosovo, and Yugoslavia with Serbia, is of course not accidental; nor is the strategic vagueness of 
“they”, which may be filled with many different names, as need dictates. 

 

243

the means to achieve it. When mentioning “battles” in his 1989 speech, he did so in such a way 
that an ordinary listener could easily choose to ignore the violent undertone.259  
 
The welcome ambiguities 
The foregoing has hopefully demonstrated how a continuous exchange between a cultural 
structure and the varying contexts in which it is enacted has produced changing but not 
unboundedly diverse performative effects. Contexts are analytically indispensable for two 
reasons. One is the necessity for actual agents to enliven the cultural structures through their 
practices, which is not to claim it is their instrumental action that determines the character of 
cultural products, or that cultural elements can be taken out of their Gestalts. The second reason 
is that cultural structures themselves have a history, which places one atop another the many 
layers of meaning inherited from the past usages. In every time- and space-located context this 
sedimented past is slightly different and therefore “the meaning” of the structure at hand cannot 
be known in the abstract. The Kosovo Myth was too often ascribed such a timeless, transparent 
and unequivocal meaning.260 

The contextual variations however profoundly depend on the multivocality inherent in 
the cultural structures themselves. Several such points of tension within the Kosovo Myth can 
now be made explicit. As Billig has long argued, ideologies, including nationalism, become 
powerful precisely thanks to their contradictory and dilemmatic character (1995: 87). The 
tensions within the Kosovo tradition may be seen as variations on the one basic theme of 
universalism and particularism, as sliding back and forth between the more narrow and 
constricted, and the more expansive and inclusive; a dialectic between the own and the shared. 
As became clear, the Myth could not have emerged at all without the sustained cultural exchange 
between Serbs and their environment.  

Some more specific ambivalences now. Take first the figure of Prince Lazar and his 
sacrifice. His identification with Christ makes it possible for believers to concentrate on this 
aspect and give the narrative a strongly religious and Christian bent (offering oneself in sacrifice 
in order to realize God’s design and His power on earth). The more atheistically minded, at the 
same time, may take Lazar as an able secular leader and commander. The sacrifice of Lazar and 
his army can and has often been, at least since 19th century, interpreted as aimed at the future 
salvation of the Serbian nation and state; but a more religious interpretation is also possible and 
not uncommon, where the subject of redemption is a broader category - of Christians, or even the 
whole of humanity. Although in recent times, the message of Kosovo has often been taken to be 
primarily one of establishing absolute, blood-drawn boundaries between “us” and “them”, this is 
not necessary. Lazar’s sacrifice can be taken as fighting a generalized evil, or even evil within. 
                                                 
259 Though the word for “battle” Milošević used, bitka, is primarily related to war, it may – like its English 
equivalent – also denote something neutral, a struggle, an effort to achieve something. How Milošević exploits the 
double meaning is notable, in what is probably the most often quoted passage from this speech: “Nowadays, six 
centuries later, we are again in battles and facing battles. They are not armed ones, although such cannot be ruled out 
either. But whatever they are, battles cannot be won without resolve, courage and sacrifice, the virtues that were 
present at the Kosovo Field on that long-past day.” This is the militaristic side, but the very next sentence reads: 
“Our main battle today refers to the achievement of economic, political, cultural and generally social prosperity. For 
approaching more rapidly and successfully the civilization humans will live in in 21st century.” Quoted from: 
www.uio.no/studier/emner/hf/ilos/BKS4110/Eksamensoppgaver/BKS4110%20V07.doc 
260 Works which acknowledge the changing meanings of the Myth but without dismissing its relevance are the least 
frequent. Good examples are the brief analyses by Bieber (2002) focusing on the political aspects, and Bakić-
Hayden (2004) with a more cultural-hermeneutical approach. Zirojević (2000) provides a condensed account of the 
historical background. 

 

244

Further, Lazar’s and Miloš’s sacrifice can be understood as purely collectivist, patriarchal and 
pre-modern message, as the imperative for individuals to give up all that is theirs, including their 
bare lives, for the benefit of the collective. Yet it can also be interpreted in a much more 
universal manner, as an instance of a very basic ethical principle of overcoming selfishness and 
egoism for a noble goal. Similarly, by their self-chosen personal sacrifice both Lazar and Miloš 
stand out powerfully as figures, so that they can be seen as strong individual personalities who 
have the courage to make difficult decisions and take all the consequences – and not just as 
slaves to a rigidly collectivist ethos. 

Against the background of ex-Yugoslav wars of the 1990s, much has been made of the 

While discourses using Kosovo are almost always performative rather than descriptive, 

presumed psychological displacement by Serbs from the original “Turks” of the epic poetry onto 
today’s Bosnian Muslims or Kosovo Albanians. But to the extent that the Kosovo Myth teaches a 
lesson in unconditional resistance to the enemy Other, the enemy does not have to be Muslim at 
all but can be anyone perceived as stronger and unjustly oppressing. The agonistic ethos of 
Kosovo may be mapped onto many different situations; it is not so much the clash between “us” 
and specific “them” as the courage of absolute withstanding against the powerful, the heroism of 
fighting against all odds, for honor and justice.261 The more unequal the battle, the greater the 
imperative to act this way, and the more “Kosovo-like” it becomes. So the “Turks” of today may 
well be Western nations and politicians, and particularly the US, because they are the most 
powerful and at the same time are perceived to be imposing things on Serbs.262 We may go back 
to the two opposed discourses and better understand how they reinforce each other through 
confrontation, at least from the Serbian side: the logic is “the more the powerful Other defames 
us, the more we shall embrace precisely what they defame, so as to show how proud, 
courageous, impossible to buy, Lazar- and Miloš-like we are, still”. 
 
what exactly their action-implications – their illocutionary and perlocutionary effects – will be is 
not foreclosed. Kosovo has often been used to prompt people to go to war, but it can also inspire 
other kinds of action. One can plausibly fight one’s own “Kosovo” in many realms of life, and 
without any blood spilled. As was said before, the wide diversity of historical moments and 
political causes in which the Kosovo covenant was invoked testify to its flexibility. A remarkable 
recent instance happened in 2001, when on June 28 the Serbian government, headed by the 
super-modernist and pragmatic Prime Minister Zoran Djindjić, extradited Slobodan Milošević to 
the International Criminal Tribunal in the Hague. Djindjić apparently took no notice of the date 
but advised that it was Vidovdan and that many people would take that to heart, he felt 
compelled to address the public. In his speech broadcast that evening, Djindjić attempted to turn 
the whole Kosovo symbolism upside down: for the sake of our own and our children’s future, he 
said, we must give up the commitment to the “heavenly kingdom” and finally opt for the 
“earthly” one: for life, prosperity and happiness. His attempt seems to have failed. He did not 
win over any of his opponents, and even some of his supporters might have been made a bit 
uneasy by this radical recoding of the axial Serbian story. Appeals to the “earthly kingdom” did 
not become any more frequent in the public sphere in the following years – on the contrary. But 
the irony is, it would be quite imaginable to construct a Kosovo-based argument in favor of 
Milošević’s extradition: a state handing voluntarily a former president over to an international 
                                                 
261 But Emmert (1990: 142) obviously overstates the matter when he claims that the Kosovo ethic is “democratic, 
anti-feudal, with a love for justice and social equality”. 
262 Kosovo covenant was also evoked on the occasion of Yugoslavia’s break with Stalin in 1948. A completely 
different context, enemy, even the “we”: but a similar cultural-psychological logic. 

 

245

  

court could, for example, be construed as an expression of Serbs’ unconditional belief in the 
ideal of justice and therefore readiness to sacrifice their more immediate interests to upholding 
higher values. We cannot know if this alternative rendition of the argument would have been 
more successful, and even less if it would have helped Djindjić avoid the assassination two years 
later. 263 
 
Trauma as a speech act 
Rather than attempting to give a clear-cut answer to whether Kosovo is or is not Serbian Trauma, 
we are now in a position to approach the question in a more fruitful way. In the language 
pragmatic perspective, both can be true at the same time. Trauma may be seen as a speech act, a 
continually discursively produced condition which stands in mutually constitutive relations with 
the contextual circumstances. In this sense, it is “there” as a cultural meaning-structure, 
Eyerman’s “referent”, or Živković’s “entrenched story”. But this does not imply that Trauma is 
actively felt by people, that it is located somehow within them, that it affects them uniformly and 
unavoidably, or that there is some mysterious connection between being Serbian and the Trauma.  

Over the centuries, the thematic cluster of Kosovo has become a traumatizing, or at least 

potentially so, interpretive framework readily available to Serbs for making sense of their 
collective experiences. Though to call it a “master narrative” would be stretching it too far, the 
Kosovo legend has certainly been the most widespread, familiar, habitual and easily usable story 
Serbs have had to explain things to themselves. This framework, although not absolutely 
conditioning, still did facilitate or funnel a traumatic rendering of a series of collective events, 
especially during the 19th and early 20th centuries, and then again in the last three decades, that is, 
whenever Albanian-Serbian rivalry over real-life Kosovo re-territorialized the Myth. These 
events in turn provided empirical fodder which reinforced the traumatic strand in the Myth. And 
in periods when the traumatic interpretations were especially powerful, they would spill out into 
ways of narrating the situations quite unrelated to (real or symbolic) Kosovo. At such moments, 
the Kosovo Trauma would become metaphoric shorthand for timeless and metaphysical “Serbian 
suffering”.  
 
The bards of Trauma 

In her interesting typology of nationalisms, Ramet (1995) uses Serbs as the example of 

“traumatic” nationalism, one that draws its energy “from a reinterpretation of Serbia’s history in 
terms of suffering, exploitation, pain, and injustice” (1995: 103) and laments that “Serbia is the 
wronged party, the universal victim, the martyr, the Jew, the new Job” (1995: 119). Yet Ramet’s 
claim that this dates back only to the late 1980s is unacceptable. The Trauma was not, and could 
not have been, invented from scratch. At that moment it already had a lengthy history.264 Those 
youngsters of the 1860s did not wail for nothing. 
                                                 
263 The nationalists would never forgive Djindjić for extraditing Milošević, and in particular for doing that on 
Vidovdan. Djindjić’s assassins, an organized crime group, said they had killed him because he was a “traitor”. But 
criminals can hardly be expected to speak the truth, so the importance of Djindjić’s radically anti-mythical attitude 
in all this should not be overestimated.  
264 Ramet’s argument is in fact quite contradictory. She relies heavily on psychoanalysis and the concepts such as 
repression, projection and compulsive repetition, while at the same time arguing that Serbian traumatic nationalism 
arose only in 1986, as a “new phenomenon” manufactured by “elite manipulation” (1995: 103, 105). One is tempted 
to say that Ramet’s essay is an illustration of how much one loses by not employing the theory of cultural trauma, 
with its injunction to clearly identify the elements of the trauma process. 

 

246

But in one thing Ramet is right, and that is the major role of the Serbian Orthodox 

Church, and other agents of unofficial, cultural nationalism in the 1980s, in constructing an 
especially insistent, and occasionally quite morbid, traumatic version of Kosovo symbolism. It 
has already been mentioned that in that crucial period the cultural nationalists and Milošević in 
power had many things in common, but the division of labor was retained: Trauma for the priests 
and the writers, and victories and Bright Future for the government. 

In those years Trauma was being produced at a rather feverish pace. It was then that some 

of the major publications in this regard appeared. These are worth examining in some detail. 
Their authors were “cultural”, seemingly non-political actors – priests, theologians, poets. All of 
them were immediately recognized as the main exponents of the contemporary, traumatic 
Serbian nationalism by both their adherents and their critics. But what is more interesting is to 
what extent they, too made use of the ambiguous doubletalk we already encountered in various 
other performances, like in Milošević’s Gazimestan speech.  

Let us begin with the simplest, because most overt, case of Matija Bećković, the foremost 
poetic bard of the new nationalism. His collection of poetic essays entitled The Service (1990) is 
a veritable compendium of traumatic themes. 

Here is what he says: “Kosovo is the most expensive [or: most precious, dearest] Serbian 

word. It was paid for by the blood of the whole people. With that price in blood it became 
enthroned on the throne of the Serbian language. ... As times goes by, it is more and more 
uncertain whether the Kosovo wound will make us heavenly or swallow us” (Bećković 1990: 
47).265 For Bećković, the Battle of Kosovo mythically and mystically instituted Serbs as a 
collectivity, and once this happened, nothing can ever change: “Folk poetry proves [!] that the 
fate of the Serbian people was resolved by just one word: the prince preferred the heavenly 
kingdom. The word was given once and for all and it can not ever be recalled” (p. 49). 
Furthermore, Serbs are and have nothing but the legacy of Kosovo: “Kosovo is the equator of the 
Serbian planet. The roof of its upper world and the foundation of the lower one. ... Kosovo is the 
most important thought, the greatest project of the Serbian culture” (p.49). In vain would one 
look for any other substance of Serbhood: “We have no firmer footing, nor more powerful 
spiritual focus. Kosovo is the fireplace around which the Serbian people is gathered, the 
mainstay around which it is weaved together, the cradle in which it was raised” (p. 68). At the 
same time, Kosovo is Serbs’ contribution to the world – the only one, it seems, and their sole 
accomplishment: “[It is] the name for what is the most precious that we have given to the 
Christian civilization. ... Heritage and bequest of Serbian art and spirit to the humankind” (p. 49). 
And back to the Trauma: “Kosovo is the deepest sore, the longest memory, the most vivid 
recollection, the most beloved ashes of the Serbian people” (p. 68).   

It could be objected that, this being poetic discourse, exaggeration and other genre-
specific figures may be excused. But the problem is that this book, like others by Bećković, 
regularly sold in thousands of copies, is taken as a political statement. It is not meant as just an 
expression of the freely creative impulse of an individual, but both its writing and its reading are 
located deliberately within the grey zone between poetic license and political responsibility. 
 
before, belongs to the contemporary landscape since it was only with its modern edition that it 
became known to the general public. Its author was Nikolaj Velimirović, an anti-communist 
bishop of the Serbian Orthodox Church active before WWII who died in emigration. Velimirović 
is a controversial figure in Serbia – much revered in the Church for his theological writings and 
                                                 
265 Živković (2001b) offers a detailed analysis of Bećković’s sinister metaphors. 

The next major Trauma-producing publication from the 1980s, although written decades 

 

247

for his presumed suffering in the hands of the Nazi and the communists, and at the same time 
heavily criticized by the liberals for his anti-Semitism and antidemocratic conservatism (Byford 
2008).  

In Velimirović we see much more clearly than in Bećković the operation of the 

universalism/particularism dialectic. The first thing to be noted about Velimirović’s essays on 
Kosovo, entitled by the editors Kosovo and Vidovdan (Velimirović 1988), is how much Christian 
humbleness and martyrdom, and how little overt aggressiveness, one finds there. A theological-
philosophical novella presents a conversation between the dying Prince Lazar, anguished by the 
dilemma whether his choice was right, and an angel reassuring him that the choice was not of 
death but of life and ultimate salvation. The martyrdom at Kosovo was necessary, because self-
deserved by Serbs’ alienation from God. This-worldly, bodily and material death and 
forthcoming suffering under the Turks is a necessary price to pay for spiritual redemption and 
thus the only true survival and advancement in the future. In another essay, Kosovo is again 
described not as a defeat but a victory: “Wrong are those who argue that Kosovo stopped the 
wheel of our history... On the contrary, it was Kosovo that made us a great people. It is our 
people’s Golgotha, but at the same time our people’s resurrection” (p.69). Serbs are here 
presented in the universalistic Christian key of redemption through suffering. 

The more exclusivistic effects are accomplished by a detour: suffering “earns” a sort of 

moral absolution in advance: “From now on”, says the angel to Prince Lazar, “whatever happens 
with your people will pull it away from the deceitful, fleeting and vacuous love of this world and 
elevate it increasingly towards the eternal heavenly love” (p. 34, emphasis added). Then, real life 
politics is reintroduced, but also by detour: “When our entire social and stately, cultural and 
political life is penetrated by the idea of the superiority of the heavenly over the earthly, we will 
have fulfilled the Prince’s bequest” (p. 103). Yet – how shall we know this “penetration” is 
complete, how do we measure it?  Further on: “Vidovdan demands purification from hate, 
selfishness and vanity. Vidovdan commands reconciliation with God and with the brothers.” 
(And they are who exactly?) “Vidovdan thunders with damnation against the traitors of the 
people’s faith and people’s mission.” (How do we recognize them?) Yet, it should not be 
overlooked that in the entire book there is hardly an objectionable line - no battle cries, no calls 
to spilling blood, no explicit hate or contempt of others. And this surface feature makes its 
messages – however they are decoded – more acceptable. 

Velimirović’s texts are an early example of a discursive move that would become 

common from the 1980s on: a rhetorical depoliticization of Kosovo, in order to wage quite 
political battles by ostensibly metaphysical means. In the preceding phrases we see how a 
rhetorical sacralization of politics opens up a dangerous space of arbitrariness.  The precise 
content of the “Kosovo covenant”, and therefore of its possible political operationalizations, are 
kept utterly vague. Elimination of shared and testable criteria of political performance invites the 
intrusion of self-appointed interpreters of what actually is the fulfillment of the Covenant. This is 
what prompted the ethnologist Ivan Čolović to coin his superb formula of Kosovo as “the golden 
bough of Serbian politics”.266  
                                                 
266 “Who manages to seize it, even if in words alone, who becomes the priest in the temple of sacred Kosovo, his is 
the power, too”. Kosovo is the “sacred name of power”, the word the authorities use to appoint and legitimate 
themselves, as wielding a “privilege and duty of the guardians of the national sanctity”. Since power is understood 
as not a political institution but a “mystical union”, no one really wants to inquire into the origins, history and 
meaning “sacred Kosovo” (Čolović 2001: 195-197).  

 

248

But the arguably most powerful Trauma-engendering product of this period was the book 

From Kosovo to Jadovno by an active Orthodox bishop, Atanasije Jevtić (2007 [1987]). The 
book, in addition to a couple of author’s essays on Kosovo themes, consists basically of 
documenting instances of victimization of Serbs at the hands of others, the first part being 
devoted to (real) Kosovo in the 1980s, and the second to the Croatian quisling state during 
WWII.267 The vacillation between the universalizing (Orthodox, Christian, human) thrust and the 
particularization of Serbs as a special people provides the basic dynamic of the text, and is 
propelled by sustained doubletalk taking place between the textual surface and the implied, half-
buried messages. Thus the programmatic text “The Kosovo Covenant” opens with the 
universalistic assertion that “all” writers on Kosovo agree that “the whole topic of Kosovo, 
particularly its rendition in folk poetry, is in fact a distinctly Serbian experience of Christianity” 
(p.375). The vacillation is sometimes felt in one and the same sentence: “This speaks to us about 
Lazar’s, and all our people’s, commitment to the Heavenly Kingdom as the enduring and 
imperishable, eternally meaningful substance of human life and history” (p. 389). Like in 
Velimirović, political implications are treated with strategic open-endedness: “We Orthodox 
Serbs... are fighting simultaneously for the earthly and the heavenly kingdom and in both cases it 
is one and the same spiritual battle that we are waging” (p.387) Or: “The liturgical moment of 
victoriousness, this supra-temporal time of the Heavenly Kingdom, made its appearance in our 
history as spiritual victory whenever Serbs manifested their Kosovo covenant and commitment, 
whenever they sought primarily the Kingdom of God and Eternal Justice” (p. 394). (How do we 
know it happened?) 
 
least potentially present, in the relentless production of Trauma by the sheer quantity of gory 
detail, by insistence on crimes against Serbs (without ever remotely mentioning crimes 
committed by them), and by the simple placing side by side the accounts of two very different 
settings, as if they were intimately connected by the metaphysical logic of Serbian suffering.269  
. 
Serbhood as victimhood  
Although multivocal, the Kosovo tradition does tend to funnel Serbian collective self-
construction along certain paths. Kosovo does not produce them by itself, since other factors also 
contribute, but it does a lot to sustain them. Two of such paths are especially prominent. One, 
which has an elective affinity with the traumatic weave in the Kosovo Myth especially in the 
versions reviewed above, is self-identification as victims, and the other is verbal grandiosity.  

At the explicit level, aggression as a response to victimization is rejected.268 But it is at 

That “we” have always been victims of evil others is, of course, not an exclusively 

Serbian idea. But Serbs seemed to have developed it rather elaborately and to stick to it with 
much enthusiasm (Jansen 2000). The most troubling consequence is the tendency to think of 
                                                 
267 Jadovno, the name of a pit where the Ustasha were throwing bodies of slain Serbs, is meant as the metonymical 
designation for all Ustasha crimes against Serbs.  
268 “God is our witness that we do not wish any evil to the Albanians” (p.120). In the Preface, another publicly 
visible nationalist bishop, Amfilohije Radović, writes that testimonies presented in the book are not meant as an 
appeal to revenge and hate, but as a “sound of alarm to come back to ourselves and our historical self-awareness, 
and an evangelical appeal to repentance and sober rationality”. 
269 The three bards were of course not the only producers of Trauma in the late 1980s: “The Kosovo wounds were 
carried and are still carried today as their own by each and every Serb. They are incurable” (Tasić and Djuretić eds. 
1991: 117). “Serbs pledged themselves to the holiness of Kosovo and they have been making it sacrifices in blood 
for six centuries already. They do not know why they are doing it, but they have to” (the poet Gojko Djogoin 1990, 
quoted in Čolović 2001: 196) 

 

249

“us” in morally righteous terms, to routinely assume own moral superiority presumably wrought 
by suffering.270 A corollary is a difficulty to engage in collective soul-searching, self-criticism 
and self-censure.271 

The basic ambiguity of the Kosovo story, deriving from the reversal of defeat into victory 

effected very early on in the religious writings, has made it possible to use it for “having it both 
ways”, as it were: to be at once a victim and a winner, and to claim moral capital on both counts 
– by virtue of suffering, and by virtue of coming out on top. The ruse is that, as Milosevich 
(2000: 74) puts it, “the martyr always triumphs”. Or, in Giesen’s (2004) terms, Kosovo seems to 
be available as both “triumph” and “trauma”, even though Giesen presents the two as mutually 
exclusive.272   

Furthermore, claim on victimhood often turns into a monopolization of it. Especially in 

strained, Trauma-favorable periods, the circle of legitimate victims tends to be restricted to “us”. 
Instead of broadening the category of victims and expanding the circle of the “we” that 
Alexander (2004a: 1) sees as an important part of the trauma process, here we have a contrary 
trend of shrinking of the “we”. The solidarity of others is not sought, perhaps it is even 
discouraged. This seems to be going on right now, with a perceived “lack of understanding” for 
Serbs on the part of the West fuelling further alienation and sinking deeper into an exclusive-
victimhood language of identity. It is also manifested in the spiteful opposition of the Serbs’ 
“celebratory” discourse to the observers’ “denouncing” one. 

Claiming moral superiority on the basis of the supposed purifying effects of suffering 

may be read as an assertion of particularism through reference to some kind of universal 
standards. Another paradoxical move of this kind is asserting Serbian specialness by insisting on 
the megalomaniac exceptionalism of Kosovo. The statements such as: “No Christian nation has 
in its history what the Serbian people has – none has Kosovo. ... Kosovo is one of its kind in the 
twenty centuries of the Christian world” (Velimirović 1988: 68- 69), or “How to present this 
spiritual meaning of Kosovo for Serbs to the public opinion, when there is no analogous example 
in the world heritage?” (a newspaper article from 1998, quoted in Čolović 2001: 208), or “Six 
centuries ago, nothing on the globe happened more important than the battle at the Kosovo 
Field” (Bećković 1990: 47) – are not at all uncommon, in spite of their extravagance, and could 
easily be heard even from ordinary people.  

This is connected with the second path along which the Kosovo legacy tends to channel 

Serbian narratives: the tendency of grandiloquence when the nation is concerned. Somehow, 
Serbs have developed the belief, or at least the habit, that when talking about matters of nation 
and state only lofty and pompous terms are in order. A down-to-earth language of Serbian 
patriotism is mostly lacking. The “great”, read national, has been decoupled from the “small” – 
the petty things of daily life, economy, work, ordinary human effort, patient building of an 
ordered collective life. Of course, Serbs have been doing all these things over the centuries, just 
as any other people, but this sort of endeavor has been kept at the side of the profane, at a 
distance from the sacrality of the nation. It is not easy to verbally perform as a good Serb talking 
about daily, this-worldly matters; there is no “sacralization of the everyday” in a Weberian sense. 
                                                 
270 How both Serbs and Albanians in (real) Kosovo ground their political claims in the morality of victimhood is 
analyzed in Zdravković 2005.  
271 Čolović (2002: 7-9) provides an ironic summary of what, following Malkki (1995), might be called Serbian 
mythico-history, revolving around victimhood and moral purity. 
272 Referring to Giesen’s terms does not mean I also subscribe to his view that “there is no way to imagine a land 
beyond the liminal horizon of triumph and trauma” (Giesen 2004: 112). Quite the contrary. I am convinced there is a 
way, if not “beyond”, then at least below such high-flying notions. 

 

250

The problem is that this contributes to a devaluation of Serbia’s civilian accomplishments during 
the two centuries of its modern history and hinders the recognition of the nation’s good in the 
democratically defined common good.  
 
The Myth as a speech act 
Not just the Trauma is continuously produced through discourse, but also the Myth itself – its 
existence, solidity, rootedness, Serbianness, utmost significance etc. are routinely re-created by 
deploying claims to that effect. Compared to the production of Trauma, the tone of this process is 
less emotional, and its social location is mostly academia. But perhaps this only makes its effects 
smoother. By being repeated so many times, and having come from the authorized mouth of the 
expert, the claims slide into everyone’s routine way of expressing whatever they have to say.  

For example: the book that purports to offer a conclusive historian’s view of the Battle of 

Kosovo, published bilingually in Serbian and German on the occasion of 600th anniversary 
(Tasić and Djuretić eds. 1991), opens with these words: “Undoubtedly the most important event 
in the entire history of the Serbian people, the Battle of Kosovo...” (p.7, emphasis added). A 
contribution to the same volume claims: “The Kosovo commitment has become not just the 
national idea but that inner trait that makes a Serb a Serb” (p. 14). Another one: “The theme of 
the Battle of Kosovo is part of our destiny, we know it was built into the foundations of our 
consciousness and our culture... The Battle of Kosovo, this is us” (p. 49).  

Not even the very sober scholars are exempt. For all her critical detachment, Zirojević 
(2000: 195-196) lists all the historical moments when Serbs’ behavior was “determined by the 
Kosovo myth” without making at all clear whether she is reporting others’ arguments or arguing 
the same herself. Or, here is how the prominent ethnologist Dušan Bandić attempts to salvage the 
idea of Kosovo as a continuous living tradition, against contrary evidence. In the early 1990s, his 
team undertook field research in rural Serbia about the actual presence of the Kosovo tradition, 
talking to hundreds of typical peasants, farmers with little education (Bandić 2001). The general 
conclusion was that the Kosovo Myth had been forgotten: knowledge of it was poor, confused 
and erroneous (Bandić 2001: 462).273 But Bandić does not give up: the Myth has survived in a 
covert form, he argues, through its “hidden message” that lives “a secret life in rural people’s 
consciousness” (Bandić 2001: 463, 465), and that is the belief that Serbs are God’s chosen 
people, better (more honest, pious, generous etc.) than the others.274 Bandić then goes on to 
“recognize” this hidden message of Kosovo in a wide variety of popular lore concerning Serbian 
identity and world politics. The connection that Bandić presents as self-evident between these 
manifestations and the supposedly still living Kosovo Myth is tenuous however, and counts on 
the complicity of the reader. Like many others, Bandić is here accomplishing a performative 
task: by producing statements on the vitality of Kosovo symbolism and its centrality for Serbs he 
hopes to produce these states of affairs as “social facts”.275  
                                                 
273 Informants, for example, mostly knew nothing of Prince Lazar, except that he had died at Kosovo; a majority did 
not know what the “Covenant” was – what kingdom Lazar had chosen. 
274 But since the belief in one’s choseness, which in practice usually boils down to belief in one’s superiority, is 
found in very many nations (Smith 2003), what is then so specifically Serbian about Kosovo? Bandić prefers to 
sidestep this difficulty. 
275 This is how it works: “Lazar’s fate is a metaphor by which Serbs represented their historical fate. They – and this 
is the message of the myth – are a chosen, heavenly people which had to pay a high price for its heavenly status. ... 
Such a self-characterization became deeply engraved in the consciousness of the Serbian people. .... Whenever a 
new ‘Kosovo’ would appear on the horizon, Serbs would choose a solution similar to Lazar’s. ... [and] without any 

 

251

 
The year 1999: the Trauma, a trauma, and the importance of registers 
In 1998-99, the symbolism of Kosovo was rather brutally terrestrialized again, with the outbreak 
of armed conflicts between the Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army and the Serbian state forces. 
In March 1999, NATO intervened, to prevent humanitarian catastrophe as was said, and bombed 
Serbia for two and a half months. The Trauma as a cultural script was now confronted with a 
real-life, palpable trauma of being victimized by the high-technology weaponry of the world’s 
most powerful military machinery, in the first attack on the territory Serbia after WWII. What is 
more, the immediate trauma was directly connected with Kosovo as the site of the original 
Trauma, and the victimization was widely perceived as thoroughly unjust, because “we are just 
trying to keep what is ours”. All the reasons were there to expect that the trauma of NATO 
bombardment would be experienced and narrated in a framework heavily determined by Trauma. 

Indeed, we find in the official statements, from Milošević’s speeches to the posters 

displayed in regime-organized protests (Jansen 2000) all the staple motifs of the Kosovo Myth. 
In his analysis of Vojska, the official magazine of the Serbian Army, during the months of 
bombing, Nedeljković (2007: 46-51) documented abundant use of mythical images.276 Yet one 
must not overestimate the significance of such official constructions. Nedeljković himself (2007: 
50) adds a precious footnote, based on his personal experience as a Serbian Army reservist: 
according to what he saw amongst his fellows, the influence of Vojska on ordinary soldiers was 
virtually nil. Protracted exposure to traumatic circumstances produced nothing but disaffection, 
skepticism and, finally, complete alienation from the official rhetoric. 

A similar duality arises between two other sets of data collected at roughly the same time 

(end of 1990s-early 2000s) which reveal vastly different, even contrary ways of talking about 
Kosovo. For the first set we are again indebted to Nedeljković (2007: 52-66) who wished to 
complement his analysis of symbolic production of the nation in official discourse with 
individual elaborations of such mythical matrices. Between 1998 and 2000, Nedeljković 
collected 200 written compositions by Belgrade university students, mostly in the Ethnology 
department, on the topic of “Serbhood” (Srpstvo). Although “Kosovo” was not a required theme, 
most respondents wrote about it. It was discussed in emotional rather than intellectual terms, and 
a lot of mythical rhetoric was used: Kosovo is “the only true core of truth”, “the heart of Serbia”, 
when one goes there “one is stunned into silence, and time comes to a halt”, “Kosovo is the 
insistent strong pain in the soul”, “Serbia’s cancer” (Nedeljković 2007: 60-61). What may first 
be noted is the contrast in which these constructions stand with the previous ethnographic data, 
collected only several years before by Bandić. What provides at least a part of the explanation is 
the differential educational levels of the two samples, but not in the direction the social scientist 
would assume: the almost illiterate peasants were less colonized by the mythical discourse than 
the urban college students. This again strongly supports the idea of the importance of the 
educational system in inculcating the allegedly inborn Serbian Trauma.  

The other set of data comes as close as any to providing insight into the vernacular 

receptions of the symbolic Kosovo. It was collected in 2001/2002, one year after the fall of the 
Milošević regime in 2000 and two years after the war of 1999. In 300 interviews with ordinary 
                                                                                                                                                             
doubt, have behaved as a ‘heavenly’ people is expected to do” (Bandić 2001: 461, italics added). These sentences, 
needless to say, are not in any way derived from the field data.  
276 Such as: Kosovo as Serbian “sacred land” that must be defended at all costs; Kosovo as Serbia’s “heart” and 
“core”; reminders of Lazar’s covenant and the heavenly kingdom; the Golgotha metaphor; assimilation of Milošević 
to Prince Lazar; etc. 

 

252

citizens of Serbia about the recent political past and prospects for the future, one question 
concerned the issue of (real) Kosovo and the 1999 NATO bombing. It was in this conjunction 
that many respondents went back to Kosovo as symbolic legacy.277 While for many (by no 
means all) of them the events of 1999 were in various ways traumatic, it is striking how much 
this was not couched in the language of the Trauma. People were familiar with the symbolic 
tradition and generally ready to respect it, but not to let it determine their political stands. They 
seemed to be caught between demands of rational positioning in the real world and moral 
sentiments of pride and justice that are so strongly associated with the Kosovo theme. The result 
was a perplexed and contradictory, but open attitude, an honest attempt to think through a 
difficult topic.278 Well-known tropes, like Serbian cradle, were often employed in casual, even 
ironic manner. As one interviewee said: “Kosovo is the sacred Serbian land – I'm joking”. 

As a general trend, the most frequent frame to discuss the topic was a simple and assured 
assertion that “Kosovo is ours”, however it was not expressed in metaphysical but rather in more 
political and legal – though doubtfully more commendable – terms that saw Kosovo as part of 
Serbia, and Serbs as the state’s entitled nation. Another general trend was for interviewees to 
acknowledge, with a sort of aggrieved resignation, that Kosovo was “lost”.279 And if this was a 
trauma for them, it was of a rather mild kind and one that they had already begun to overcome.  

So how do we account for the difference between extensively mythicized discourse in the 

first data, and uneasy realism in the second? The main reason lies, I believe, in the different 
framings of the discussion, resulting in two different registers people were employing in 
response to these framings. Nedeljković’s assigned title-appeal, “Serbhood”, framed the issue in 
a way inviting the mythologizing approaches: srpstvo is a very loaded word, abstract and 
general, with a flavor of artificiality; it is not a word one would use in daily speech (not even 
when talking “grand” of the nation). The other data were obtained within a questionnaire that 
provided a frame doubly different from the former: it was a) rational, and b) concrete, personal 
and experiential. Interviewees were called on to express their own personal experience, and 
reflections on that experience, to refer to the concrete events, dates, facts from their life and the 
collective life insofar as it affected them. The whole research design did not encourage 
generalized and empirically unfounded proclamations. Thus different discursive registers 
produced divergent ways of talking about the same things. Maybe even if the very same people 
participated in both studies, they would have talked just as differently.  
 
                                                 
277 The project's title was “Politics and everyday life” and its findings are presented in Golubović et al. (eds.) 2003, 
an English summary in Spasić 2008. 
278 Examples from some interviews: “I don't feel Kosovo to be part of my country, because in effect it is not, but 
essentially it is. I mean, if you take history, religion... Now many people say history is no longer important, because 
it all happened ten centuries ago, but it is... It has always been part of Serbia – all that we were told, the cradle of the 
Serbian people, this and that, but it is true. Now, what it is really... but actually it no longer is, so...” Or, another 
person: ”And the battle of Kosovo, we pledge to Nemanja, Lazar, this and that, well, they are long gone, this is 
nonsense. They were fighting with maces, and now is the time of the atomic bomb”, but immediately goes on to say: 
“Now we must try to save Kosovo, the Serbian cradle, with all those cultural monuments that are now being burned 
down.” A clear tension between pragmatism and loyalty to tradition: “This Kosovo Myth, it has maintained Serbs 
for centuries... It is the heart of Serbia... Miloš Obilić, and other known and unknown heroes... But true, definitely, 
we cannot live of such myths”. 
279 Such as: “We saw Kosovo was gone”, “We were deceiving ourselves concerning Kosovo, it had been sold out 
long ago”, “It hurts so much, but I think Kosovo will be taken away from us”, “I'm very much emotionally attached 
to Kosovo, but I think it is lost and we'd better invest this energy into something else.” 

 

253

A common language in which to disagree 
The long history of the Trauma as a cultural structure has produced the layered character of its 
meanings. Yes, Kosovo “means” something to most Serbs, probably even “matters” to them. But 
the contents of this are of highly diverse origin.280 Furthermore, the layered meanings are only 
partly expressible in words. They may also involve a whole range of vague feelings of 
uneasiness, discontent and shame, provoked by the recent collective experiences. For example, 
remembrances of the Myth’s association with Milošević’s aggressive and failed policies – that is, 
with wars, national humiliation and international isolation – might also have become part of the 
Kosovo Trauma as it is experienced today, but will hardly be made explicit. So within the 
seemingly singular Trauma some meaning layers may be closer to the surface and more readily 
articulable, and others buried, tacit and possibly activated only in the mode of Herzfeldian 
“cultural intimacy”. This would amount to more than just different “meanings”, to profoundly 
different emotional and moral import – including outright irrelevance of the Trauma to an 
individual Serb.281 What remains, and what really acts as the much-extolled “connective tissue” 
among Serbs, is the identical language they are all familiar with, the “entrenched” symbolism of 
Kosovo which rhetorically brings all of these differences together, without admitting it. The 
name remains the same, providing the impression of stability, and making it possible to 
ostensibly “revive” the myth, while in fact it is turned in nothing but “a useful cliche or linguistic 
stereotype, a ‘reference’ and argument in ideological use” (Djerić 2005: 30) 

It has been pointed out repeatedly that the tropes of the Kosovo legend, especially in its 

epic guise, have often been used as political devices for censuring, condemning and morally 
polluting political opponents. We have seen how the labels of Vuk Branković or, conversely, of 
Lazar and Miloš, were exchanged by all kinds of political forces since the mid-19th century.282 
This practice has been so widespread in Serbian political life that the function of internal 
exclusion may qualify as an even more prominent pragmatic function of the Trauma than 
aggression towards others.  

Nevertheless, mechanisms of exclusion may be more subtle than the explicit pollution of 
the opponent by calling him/her traitor. An excellent instance of this more oblique deployment 
was provided in 2006 by the then-Prime Minister Vojislav Koštunica, a democratic but 
conservative nationalist. Speaking at the symbolically highly charged site of the ancient Serbian 
monastery of Hilandar in Greece, Koštunica said: “Everybody knows what Kosovo means to us.” 
Let us have a closer look at this phrase. If “everybody” knows it, then those who feel they do not 
know exactly what Kosovo means to them, or to others, cannot help feeling excluded or better, 
completely obliterated (since they do not even belong to the “everybody”). If everybody 
“knows” something, then there is no need at all to articulate, discuss and argue this something. 
Finally, who the “us” are is similarly unclear (Serbs? all of them, or only some? and if some, are 
                                                 
280 As Brubaker (2004: 56) reminds, the materials that collective identities are made of include, in addition to the 
more famous mythomoteurs and other long-term factors, “also the moderately durable ways of thinking and feeling 
that represent ‘middle-range’ legacies of historical experience and political action”. 
281 When Dragnich and Todorovich begin their “blood” phrase with: “Kosovo is many diverse things to different 
living Serbs...”, this is not acknowledgment of fundamental disagreement. What they have in mind is variation 
within the range of the beautiful, sublime and awesome. In celebratory discourses in general, apparent diversity of 
meanings is often used to enhance the effect of all-Serbian pervasiveness of the Myth, but it never includes the idea 
that Kosovo to an individual Serb may mean something unpleasant, irritating, silly, boring, embarrassing, old-
fashioned, awkward, worn-out etc. 
282 These practices, extremely detrimental to the development of a democratic political culture, were dubbed by 
Naumović (2005) „quasi-ethnic identity splits“. 

 

254

these the patriots, the religious, the members of Koštunica’s party, or his voters, or...? ) Hence, 
by a short and seemingly innocuous phrase, all those who do not recognize themselves in it are 
excluded from the community. But this is done implicitly, which makes the move less 
conspicuous and harder to challenge: one would not really know how to protest it.283 The main 
paradox involved in both “simple” and “complex” strategies of exclusion is that the Trauma, 
presented as what binds Serbs together, is used to produce internal and self-inflicted 
traumatization of the national polity, by deepening cleavages within and preventing their 
pacification.  

The period after 2000 has been characterized by a series of new twists and turns on the 
Kosovo theme. After the war of 1999 and installment of international administration in (real) 
Kosovo, its status has remained unresolved, which has been conducive to a mood in Serbia in 
which it is quite easy to score political points by rising the rhetorical stakes in discussing 
Kosovo. While the unofficial, more personalized and private discourse, as the quoted interviews 
show, was characterized by a general rationalism and open-mindedness, the discourse produced 
by political elites has sought a re-traumatization of Serbian attitude to Kosovo. Instead of being 
gradually replaced by more rational and realistic, policy-oriented suggestions, the tropes of the 
Kosovo myth in its most traumatic cast have been liberally employed by elite actors, who were 
trying to outdo one another in upholding the sanctity of Kosovo. As the verbal stakes were 
continuously risen, it has become all but impossible to talk about Kosovo, real as well as 
symbolic, in anything but the most elevated tone. A whole range of positions on the issue have 
become discursively unavailable or excessively costly.284 On the other hand, uttering or 
supporting empty phrases like “Kosovo is Serbia!”, “We shall never give up Kosovo!”, “Kosovo 
is our sacred land!” and so on, costs nothing and can bring some profit – if anything, the profit of 
showing that one is not sticking out. So everybody choose to repeat these phrases, without much 
thinking. At the same time people harbor all kinds of doubts and grudges against the symbolic 
prevalence of Kosovo and its mythical impingements on current Serbian policies, but are 
extremely uncomfortable to express them in public, or even to themselves, because the 
sacredness of the topic has been so extremely enhanced. This private and subdued attitude of 
weary irritation is almost impossible to pin down: one may feel it in muttered remarks, half-
voiced comments, and grumbles overheard, on people’s faces and in tone of their voices.  

This came out in elections. The year 2008 was hot with passions, with (real) Kosovo’s 
proclamation of independence in February, ensuing protests turned riots in Belgrade, including 
the raiding and burning of US embassy, sudden icing of Serbia’s relations with the Western 
countries etc. The public sphere reverberated with innumerable invocations of Lazar’s oath and 
the bequest of the Kosovo heroes, particularly in the campaign of the ultranationalists. 
Nevertheless, in February 2008 the incumbent democratic president Boris Tadić was reelected, 
and in parliamentary elections held in May a democratic coalition marked a convincing 
                                                 
283 Some more examples of the same device: “A Serb is the one whom Kosovo concerns” (Bećković 1991: 68). Or, 
in Velimirović (1988: 71) “Those who scowl at Kosovo; those who belittle, condemn, or hate it... such are not real 
Serbs... And real Serbs ... ought to thank the Lord for having given them Kosovo, their pride and comfort.” And here 
is Jevtić (2007): “It is impossible for the word Kosovo to be mentioned without causing profound agitation in each 
of us Serbs. ...  There is no Serb who has not thought, spoken, written about Kosovo, grieved over it and resurrected 
through it” (pp.374, 116). Italics added. 
284 When in 2007 prominent journalist Boško Jakšić argued in his column in Politika for Serbia’s acknowledgment 
of an independent Kosovo, this provoked public uproar that lasted for weeks.  

 

255

victory.285 True, Tadić and his democrats, just like almost everybody on the Serbian political 
scene, consider Kosovo’s independence illegal and fight it as they can; but whatever one may 
think of their Kosovo policy, it is not extremist, and, even more to the point, it contains virtually 
no mythologizing rhetoric. Pointing in the same direction, polling data show that, when asked to 
list the most important problems Serbia is currently facing, people place (the status of real) 
Kosovo below “unemployment”, “low living standard” and “corruption” (SMMRI 2008).286  
If we then go back to the question – is there a Kosovo Trauma for Serbs?, the answer 

may be “yes”, provided that we understand its proper location: it does not dwell in Serbs, but in 
the discursive space between them. And the Trauma itself involves a whole knot of entangled 
traumas, not necessarily those that bards of the Trauma strove to inculcate. The deceptive 
simplicity of the noun, Kosovo, might also hide traumas of the Yugoslav wars, including the 
“trauma of perpetrators”; the trauma of being caught in an irresolvable conflict with a 
neighboring people, Albanians; the trauma of Serbia’s exclusion from European integration; the 
trauma of living in a faulty democracy and continuing economic stagnation. And also, perhaps, 
the trauma of being forced into a traumatic identity and lacking the language in which to express 
one’s dissent without being called a traitor. 
 
 
References 
. 
Alexander, Jeffrey 2004a. “Toward a theory of cultural trauma”, pp. 1-30 in J. Alexander et al. 

Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity, Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Alexander, Jeffrey 2004b. “On the social construction of moral universals: The ’Holocaust’ from 
war crime to trauma drama ”, pp. 196-263 in J. Alexander et al. Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity, Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Antonijević, Dragana 2007a. Karađorđe i Miloš: Između istorije i predanja, Beograd: Etnološka 

biblioteka. 

Antonijević, Dragana 2007b. Karađorđe i Miloš: Mit i politika, Beograd: Etnološka biblioteka. 
Anzulović, Branimir 1999. Heavenly Serbia: From Myth to Genocide, New York and London: 

New York University Press. 

Bakić-Hayden, Milica 2004. „National memory as narrative memory: The case of Kosovo“, pp. 
25-40 in: Maria Todorova (ed.), Balkan Identities: Nation and Memory, New York: New 
York University Press. 

Bandić, Dušan 1997 [1990]. Carstvo zemaljsko i carstvo nebesko, Beograd: XX vek.  
Bandić, Dušan 2001. „Tajni život kosovskog mita“, pp. 461-66 in: Zbornik Etnografskog muzeja 

u Beogradu: 1901-2001, ed. by J. Bjeladinović- Jergić. 

Bećković, Matija 1990. Služba, Beograd: SKZ 
Bieber, Florian 2002. „Nationalist Mobilization and Stories of Serb Suffering: The Kosovo myth 

from 600th anniversary to the present”, Rethinking History 6(1): 95–110. 

Billig, Michael 1995. Banal Nationalism, London: Sage. 
                                                 
285 The coalition “For European Serbia” (Democratic Party/G17) won 38.40% of the vote and 102 seats in 
Parliament, while the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party came second with 29.45% (78). Source: CeSID, 
http://www.cesid.org/rezultati/sr_maj_2008/index.jsp 
286 From mid-2005 to end of 2008 the percentage of respondents placing Kosovo among chief problems ranged on 
the average between 20 and 30%, with scores over 40% at only 4 points over that period, all concentrated around 
February 2008, and falling to 13% in November 2008. At the same time, “Unemployment” scored consistently 
between 45 and 60%, and “Low living standards” between 35 and 45% (more than one priority could be listed). 

 

256

Blagojević, Miloš 1990. „Vojno-istorijske rekonstrukcije kosovske bitke“, pp. 11-22 in S. 

Ćirković (ed.), Okrugli sto Kosovska bitka u istoriografiji, Beograd: Istorijski institut. 

Bogdanović, Dimitrije 2006 [1985]. Knjiga o Kosovu, Beograd: SKZ.  
Bojović, Boško 1991. „Geneza kosovske ideje u prvim postkosovskim hagiografsko-

istoriografskim spisima“, pp. 15-28 in: N.Tasić and V. Djuretić (eds.), Kosovska bitka 
1389. i njene posledice, Beograd: SANU. 

Brubaker, Rogers 2004. „Ethnicity without groups“, pp. 50-77 in: Ethnicity, Nationalism, and 

Minority Rights, ed. by S. May, T. Modood and J.Squires, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Byford, Jovan 2008. Denial and Repression of Anti-Semitism: Post-communist Remembrance of 

the Serbian Bishop Nikolaj Velimirović, Budapest: CEU Press. 

Cvijić, Jovan 1992. [1931] „Dinarski, centralni i panonski tip“ (from the study Balkansko 

poluostrvo), pp. 33-88 in: B. Jovanović (ed.), Karakterologija Srba, Beograd: Naučna 
knjiga. 

Čolović, Ivan 2001. Dubina, Beograd: Samizdat B92. 
Čolović, Ivan 2002 [1997]. The politics of symbol in Serbia: Essays in political anthropology, 

translated by Celia Hawkesworth, London: Hurst. 

Ćirković, Sima 1990. „Kosovska bitka kao istorijski problem“, pp. 109-118 in: S. Ćirković (ed.), 

Okrugli sto Kosovska bitka u istoriografiji, Beograd: Istorijski institut. 

Ćosić, Dobrica 2004. Kosovo, Beograd: Novosti. 
Di Lellio, Anna and Stephanie Schwandner-Sievers. 2006. “The Legendary Commander: the 

construction of an Albanian master-narrative in post-war Kosovo”, Nations and 
Nationalism, 12 (3): 513–529. 

Djerić, Gordana 2005. Pr(a)vo lice množine, Beograd: IFDT/Filip Višnjić. 
Djordjević, Dimitrije 1991. „The tradition of Kosovo in the formation of modern Serbian 

statehood in the nineteenth century“, pp. 309-330 in: Wayne S. Vucinich and Thomas A. 
Emmert (eds.), Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval Battle, Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. 

Dragnich, Alex and Slavko Todorovich 1984. The saga of Kosovo: Focus on Serbian-Albanian 

relations, Boulder, CO: East European Monographs. 

Dragović-Soso, Jasna 2002. Saviours of the nation?: Serbia’s intellectual opposition and the 

revival of nationalism, London: Hurst. 

Dvorniković, Vladimir 1939. Karakterologija Jugoslovena, Beograd: Geca Kon. 
Duijzings, Ger 2000. Religion and the Politics of Identity in Kosovo, London: Hurst. 
Emmert, Thomas A. 1990. Serbian Golgotha: Kosovo 1389, New York: Columbia University 

Press (East European Monographs). 

Eyerman, Ron 2002. Cultural Trauma, Port Chester, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Giesen, Bernhard 2004. “The trauma of perpetrators: The Holocaust as the traumatic reference of 

German national identity”, pp. 112- 154 in: J. Alexander et al, Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity, Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Golubović, Zagorka, Ivana Spasić and Đorđe Pavićević (eds.) 2003. Politika i svakodnevni život: 

Srbija 1999-2002, Beograd: IFDT. 

Jansen, Stef 2000. „Victims, Underdogs and Rebels: Discursive Practices of Resistance in 

Serbian Protest”, Critique of Anthropology Vol. 20(4): 393–419. 

Jevtić, Atanasije 2007 [1987]. Od Kosova do Jadovna, Trebinje/Vrnjci: Manastir Tvrdoš/ 

Bratstvo sv. Simeona Mirotočivog. 

 

257

Kantorowicz, Ernest 1957. The King’s Two Bodies: A Study in Mediaeval Political Theology, 

Loma, Aleksandar 2002. Prakosovo: slovenski i indoevropski koreni srpske epike, Beograd: 

Princeton:  Princeton University Press. 

Balkanološki institut SANU. 

Lord, Albert B. 1964. The Singer of Tales, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Luci, Nita and Predrag Marković 2008. „Događaji i pozornice različitosti: označavanje ’sebe’ i 
’drugih’ na Kosovu“, pp. 280-309 in: Gordana Djerić (ed.), Intima javnosti, Belgrade: 
Fabrika knjiga/IFDT.  

Malkki, Liisa 1995. Purity and Exile: Violence, memory and national cosmology among Hutu 

refugees in Tanzania, Chicago & London: University of Chicago Press. 

Mihailovich, Vasa D. 1991. „The tradition of Kosovo in Serbian literature“, pp. 141-158 in: W. 
S. Vucinich and T.A. Emmert (eds.), Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval Battle, Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 

Mihaljčić, Rade 1990. “Motiv izdaje u istoriografiji”, pp. 23-31 in: S. Ćirković (ed.), Okrugli sto 

Kosovska bitka u istoriografiji, Beograd: Istorijski institut. 

Naumović, Slobodan 2005. „The social origins and political uses of popular narratives on 

Serbian disunity“, Filozofija i društvo 26: 65-104.  

Naumović, Slobodan 2008. Neo-tradicionalističke ideje u političkom i javnom životu Srbije na 
kraju 20. veka, Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Ethnology and Anthropology, Faculty 
of Philosophy, University of Belgrade 

Nedeljković, Saša 2007. Čast, krv i suze, Beograd : Zlatni zmaj/Odeljenje za etnologiju i 

antropologiju Filozofskog fakulteta. 

O’Brien, Conor Cruise 1987. God Land: Reflections on Religion and Nationalism, Cambridge 

MA &d London: Harvard University Press.  

Palavestra, Predrag 1991. Književnost – kritika ideologije, Beograd: SKZ. 
Popov, Nebojša 2000. „Traumatology of the party-state”, pp. 81-108 in: N. Popov (ed.), The 

Road to War in Serbia, Budapest: CEU Press. 

Popov, Nebojša (ed.) 2000. The Road to War in Serbia: Trauma and Catharsis, Budapest: CEU 

Press.  

Popovich, Ljubica 1991. „The Battle of Kosovo (1389) and battle themes in Serbian Art“, pp. 

227-308 in: W.S. Vucinich and T.A. Emmert (eds.), Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval 
Battle, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Ramet, Sabrina Petra 1995. “The Serbian Church and the Serbian Nation”, pp. 101-122 in: S. P. 
Ramet and Lj.S. Adamovich (eds.), Beyond Yugoslavia: Politics, Economics, and Culture 
in a Shattered Community, Boulder: Westview Press. 

Rosandić, Ružica and Vesna Pešić (eds.) 1994. Ratništvo, patriotizam, patrijarhalnost: Analiza 

udžbenika za osnovne škole, Beograd: Centar za antiratnu akciju/Grupa Most. 

Sells, Michael A. 2002. “The Construction of Islam in Serbian Religious Mythology and Its 

Consequences”, pp. 56-85 in: Maya Schatzmiller (ed.), Islam and Bosnia: Conflict 
Resolution and Foreign Policy in Multi-Ethnic States, Montreal&Kingston: McGill-
Queen’s University Press. 

Smith, Anthony 1997. ‘Golden Age’ and National Renewal”, pp. 36-59 in: Geoffrey Hosking 

and George Schöpflin (eds.), Myths and Nationhood, London: Hurst. 

Smith, Anthony 2003. Chosen Peoples: Sacred sources of national identity, Oxford: Oxford 

University Press. 

 

258

SMMRI 2008. “Attitudes concerning Kosovo”, Monthly Omnibus Survey, press release, 

Strategic Marketing Research, Belgrade, December 2008. 

Spasić, Ivana 2008. “Serbia 2000-2008: a changing political culture?”, Balkanologie, Vol. XI, n° 

1-2, décembre 2008, http://balkanologie.revues.org/index1282.html 

Tasić, Nikola and Veselin Djuretić (eds.) 1991. Kosovska bitka 1389. i njene posledice: 

Međunarodni simpozijum Himelstir 1989, Beograd: SANU. 

Tomashevich, George Vid 1991. „The Battle of Kosovo and the Serbian Church“, pp. 203-226 
in: Wayne S. Vucinich and Thomas A. Emmert (eds.), Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval 
Battle, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

van de Port, Mattijs 1999. “‘It Takes a Serb to Know a Serb’: Uncovering the roots of obstinate 

otherness in Serbia”, Critique of Anthropology, Vol. 19(1), pp. 7–30. 
Velimirović, (Bishop) Nikolaj 1988. Kosovo i Vidovdan, Šabac: Glas crkve. 
Vetlesen, Arne Johan 2005. Evil and Human Agency: Understanding Collective Evildoing, 

Cambridge: Cambridge U. Press. 

Vickers, Miranda 1998. Between Serb and Albanian: A History of Kosovo, London: Hurst. 
Volkan,  Vamik  D.  1996.  “Bosnia-Herzegovina:  Ancient  Fuel  of  a  Modern  Inferno.  Mind  and 

Human Interaction 7:110-127. 

Volkan,  Vamik  D.  2001.  “Transgenerational  transmissions  and  chosen  traumas:  An  aspect  of 

large-group identity”, Group Analysis, 34(1): 79-97. 

Volkan, Vamik D. 2002. “Bosnia-Herzegovina: Chosen trauma and its transgenerational 

transmission”, pp. 86-97 in: M.Schatzmiller (ed.), Islam and Bosnia, 
Montreal&Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press. 

Vucinich, Wayne S. and Thomas A. Emmert (eds.) 1991. Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval Battle, 

Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.   

Zdravković, Helena 2005. Politika žrtve na Kosovu, Beograd: Etnološka biblioteka.  
Zirojević, Olga 2000. „Kosovo in the Collective Memory“, pp. 189-211 in: N.Popov (ed.), The 

Road to War in Serbia: Trauma and Catharsis, Budapest: CEU Press. 

Žanić, Ivo 1998. Prevarena povijest: Guslarska estrada, kult hajduka i rat u Hrvatskoj i Bosni i 

Hercegovini 1990-1995. godine, Zagreb: Durieux. 

Živković, Marko 2001a. „Serbian Stories of Identity and Destiny in the 1980s and 1990s”, 

unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Chicago 

Živković, Marko 2001b. „Kosovo is the most expensive Serbian word: political enchantment and 

Milošević’s rise to power“, Anthropology of East Europe Review 19(1). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

259

Solidarizing with the kidnap victims: 

On the generalization of trauma across a fragmented civil sphere 

 
 
 

 

 

Carlo Tognato 

Associate Professor 

Department of Sociology 

National University of Colombia, Bogota 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Faculty Fellow 

Center for Cultural Sociology 

Yale University 

Trauma Book Project, edited by Jeffrey Alexander and Ron Eyerman 

260

