                            

List of Papers: 
 
“Trauma Construction and Moral Restriction: The Ambiguity of the Holocaust for Israel” 
Jeffrey C. Alexander and Shai Dromi 
 
“The Cultural Trauma of Katyn Massacre” 
Ron Eyerman and Dominik Bartmanski 
 
“Claiming Trauma Through Social Performance: The Case of Waiting for Godot” 
Elizabeth Butler Breese 
 
“The Drama of the Greek Civil War Trauma” 
Nicolas Demertzis 
 
“Revolutionary Trauma and Representation of the War: the Case of China in Mao’s Era” 
Rui Gao 
 
“A Fire That Doesn’t Burn? The Allied Bombing of Germany and the Cultural Politics of 
Trauma” 
Volker Heins and Andreas Langenohl 
 
“Traumatic Memory in Generational Perspective” 
Radim Marada 
 
“’1974’ as Cultural Trauma” 
Victor Roudometof and Miranda Christou   

“The Trauma of Kosovo in Serbian National Narratives” 
Ivana Spasic 
 
“Solidarizing with the kidnap victims: On the generalization of trauma across a fragmented civil 
sphere” 
Carlo Tognato 
 
“Narrating Cultural Trauma of Defeat in Postwar Japan”                       
Akiko Hashimoto 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

1

 

 

Trauma Construction and Moral Restriction: 

The Ambiguity of the Holocaust for Israel 

                                      Jeffrey C. Alexander and Shai Dromi 

 

        Yad Vashem Fires Employee Who Compared Holocaust to Nakba 

Shapira confirmed, in a telephone conversation with Haaretz, that he had spoken to 

Haaretz, April 23, 2009: Yad Vashem has fired an instructor who compared the trauma of 

 
Jewish Holocaust survivors with the trauma experienced by the Palestinian people in Israel’s 
War of Independence. Itamar Shapiro, 29, of Jerusalem, was fired before Passover from his job 
as a docent at the Holocaust Martyrs’ and Heroes’ Remembrance Authority, after a teacher with 
a group of yeshiva students from Efrat made a complaint. Shapiro had worked at Yad Vashem 
for three and a half year….        
 
visitors about the 1948 massacre at Deir Yassin. He said he did so because the ruins of the Arab 
village, today a part of Jerusalem’s Givat Shaul neighborhood, can be seen as one leaves Yad 
Vashem. “Yad Vashem talks about the Holocaust survivors’ arrival in Israel and about creating a 
refuge here for the world’s Jews. I said there are people who lived on this land and mentioned 
that there are other traumas that provide other nations with motivation,” Shapira said. “The 
Holocaust moved us to establish a Jewish state and the Palestinian nation’s trauma is moving it 
to seek self-determination, identity, land and dignity, just as Zionism sought these things,” he 
said.  
 
that every visitor can draw his own political conclusions … “Yad Vashem would have acted 
unprofessionally had Itamar Shapira continued his educational work for the institute,” [Yad 
Vashem spokeswoman Iris] Rosenberg said. Yad Vashem employs workers and volunteers from 
the entire political and social spectrum, who know how to separate their personal position from 
their work, she said. 
 
Shapira said Vad Yashem chooses to examine only some of the events that took place in 
the War of independence. “It is being hypocritical. I only tried to expose the visitors to the facts, 
not to political conclusions. If Yad Vashem chooses to ignore the facts, for example the massacre 
at Deir Yassin, or the Nakba [“The Catastrophe,” the Palestinians’ term for what happened to 
them after 1948], it means that it’s afraid of something and that its historical approach is flawed,” 
Shapiro said. 
 
This disheartening report from Israel’s most influential newspaper illustrates the idea that is at 

The institution’s position is that the Holocaust cannot be compared to any other event and 

 

the core of this collective research project. References to trauma, and representations about it, are not 

 

2

just individual but social and collective. Who was responsible for a collective trauma, who were its 

victims, and what the trauma’s moral lessons for our own time  – these are not simply theoretical or 

empirical issues for professional social scientists. They are fundamental concerns of everyday life, 

matters for reporting in daily newspapers and websites, and they powerfully affect contemporary 

conflicts at the individual, institutional, national, and global levels.  

 

As this Haaretz report also demonstrates, however, the manner in which collective traumas are 

presented in everyday life is naturalistic, to the point of being dangerously naïve. Traumas are spoken 

about as if they are simply historical facts, as things that happened, clearly understand events, empirical 

things that can either be recognized or ignored. How we choose to react to the facts of trauma is 

presented as if it were simply a matter of personal, individual reflection.  

 

According to the cultural-sociological approach, however, neither of these latter suppositions is 

correct. Collective traumas are not found, they are made. Something awful usually did occur, but how it 

is represented remains an open question, subject to whirling spirals of signification, fierce power 

contests, simplifying binaries, subtle stories, fickle audiences, and counter-narrations. Individuals do not 

respond to traumas but to trauma constructions. How they come to reflect upon them is certainly a 

matter for individual conscience, but it is also a massively collective thing. Individuals experience the 

pain and suffering of defeat, and the hopes for future emancipation, in terms of collective stories that 

engulf and instruct them, sometimes in positive, sometimes in frightening ways. 

 

Earlier work on the Nazi murder of six million Jews1 explored how the representation of this 

horrendous event shifted, in the half-century after it transpired, from “war crime” to “Holocaust.” As a 

heinous event associated with Nazism, the mass murder was initially contextualized inside the culture 

                                                 
1 Alexander, “The Social Construction of Moral Universals: The ‘Holocaust from War Crime to Trauma Drama,” in 
Alexander, Eyerman, Giesen, Smelzer, and Sztompka, Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity (2004). See also 
Alexander, Understanding the Holocaust: A Debate (Oxford University Press, 2009), where that earlier piece is 

 

3

structures that had framed the second World War, a civilization-versus-barbarism binary, on the one 

hand, and a progressive narrative of modern amelioration, on the other. For two decades afterward, this 

binary and narrative frame allowed Western nations to keep the mass murder of the Jews, even as it 

remained ferociously stigmatized, as an event very much relegated to the past. In the postwar period, 

people looked to the future and engaged in reconstruction. They saw themselves as building a new, 

modern, and civilized society, one in which Nazi genocide would never be allowed to happen again. 

These efforts at civil repair were not illusory. Democracies were reconstructed from dictatorships, and 

millennia long anti-Semitic barriers were overcome. Nevertheless, in the course of the 1960’s this grand 

narrative of postwar progressive, which had sequestered racial, religious, and ethnic mass murder in a 

distant past began, began to be vulnerable and to change.  

 

Collective traumas are complex symbolic-cum-emotional constructions that have significant 

autonomy from, and power over, social structure and interests in the more material sense. At the same 

time, however, trauma constructions are affected by the kinds of social groups that promote them, by the 

distribution of resources to broadcast them, and by the institutional structure of the social arenas in 

which their construction takes place. With the rise of anti-Western, anti-colonial movements abroad, and 

the emergence of anti-war movements racial and ethnic movements of liberation at home, the postwar 

protagonists of the progressive narrative were profoundly challenged. Their purity became polluted by 

association with their own ethnic, racial, and religious massacres, and their ability to maintain the 

civilization-barbarism binary destroyed. Rather than being seen as carriers of universalism, they were 

accused of being primordial and particularistic themselves. It was as these new understandings 

developed that the shift from “war crime” to “Holocaust” emerged. Rather than being relegated to the 

past, the dangers of massive racial, ethnic, and religious domination, and even mass murder, moved 

                                                                                                                                                             
subjected to intense debate. The present chapter draws from, revises, and substantially extends the Alexander’s 
postscript to that volume. 

 

4

forward into the present. They became part of modernity. For contemporaries, the Holocaust shifted 

from a progressive to a tragic narrative. It became a story about hubris and punishment. A trauma drama 

that evoked sorrow and pity, its victims became objects of universal identification and its perpetrators 

were now constructed as representing humanity rather than any particular national group. Its bathetic 

denouement provided a drama of eternal return to which contemporaries felt compelled to return over 

and over again. The Holocaust came to be seen as the singular representation of the darkness of the 

twentieth century, the humbling lesson upon which was erected post-modern doubt. Yet, this humbling 

and tragic lesson created a new, more universal standard of moral judgment for present and future 

humankind.  

 

This research on Holocaust and trauma construction was conducted in the late 1990s. It was a 

time of cautious optimism. The American and European intervention in Kosovo seemed to provide 

singular evidence for the universalizing power of the Holocaust effect. Dictatorships were still being 

turned into democracies, and there was a bubbling effervescence about the emergence of global civil 

society. It was a time to focus on the emergence of global narratives about the possibility of justice, 

among which there was no more surprising and inspiring story than the transvaluation of the Jewish 

mass murder from an historically situated war crime into tragic trauma drama whose moral lessons had 

became central to all modernity. In the words of Bernhard Giesen, a principal collaborator in that earlier 

project, this transvaluation process provided “a new transnational paradigm of collective identity,” 

according to which the Holocaust became the “global icon of evil.” In Alexander put it, “a specific and 

situated historical event” had become “transformed into a generalized symbol of human suffering,” a 

“universal symbol whose very existence has created historically unprecedented opportunities for ethnic, 

 

5

racial, and religious justice, for mutual recognition, and for global conflicts becoming regulated in a 

more civil way.”2 

 

We live now in a darker time, more divided, more violent, more tense. We have become much 

more cautious about the possibilities for a global civil society, more sensitive to the continuing festering 

of local wounds and their often explosive and debilitating world-wide effects. This is the time to explore 

the relationship between cultural trauma and collective identity in a different way, elaborating the theory 

so that it can explain not only more universalizing but more particularistic and deleterious results. In this 

chapter, we return to the historical genealogy of the Holocaust, but connect it with the emergence of a 

radically different carrier group, a drastically divergent social setting, and spirals of signification that 

depart sharply in their symbolic meanings and moral implications. We connect Holocaust symbolization 

not to pluralist Western democracies but to a democracy bent on securing the foundations of a single 

religion, not to a post-war national context to but to a nation that founded in war, facing challenges to its 

very existence for decades after, right up until today. For this Jewish nation, despite its progressive 

aspirations, the memory of the Jewish mass murder connoted tragedy from the outset, and the catharsis 

produced by iterations of the trauma-drama sustained moral strictures of more particularistic and 

primordial than universal and civil kinds. 

                                     Tragic Dramas, Divergent Effects 

 

Going beyond the progressive narrative to a tragic vision compels members of a collectivity to 

narrate and symbolically re-experience the suffering of a trauma’s victims. If, however, these victims are 

represented narrowly – as simply the story tellers themselves -- the tragic trauma-drama may not, in fact, 

have a sympathy-generating effect. It creates not identification with extended others but with ancestors, 

who share the same primordial identity as the story tellers themselves. The tragic trauma drama 

produces catharsis, but it is not the enlightening pity that Aristotle once described. It is more self-pity, a 

                                                 
2 Giesen 2009, Alexander 2004.   

 

6

sentiment that blocks identification and undermines the expansion of moral feeling that such 

contemporary neo-Aristotelians as Martha Nussbaum have prescribed. It is not a universalizing love for 

the other but a more restrictive self-love, a feeling that cuts experience short, encouraging emotional 

splitting and moral scapegoating.  

 

In this emplotment, the moral implications of the drama of eternal return are inverted. Not being 

able to get beyond the originating trauma, feeling compelled again and again to return to it, actually 

reinforces the particularistic hatreds that inspired the aggression and murder of that earlier time. 

Narrowing rather than universalizing in morality and affect, earlier hatreds are reproduced, not 

overcome. Rather than expanded human sympathy for the other, we have Hitler revenging the defeated 

German people, Serbia’s ethnic cleansing, and Hindu nationalism’s bloody minded struggle against 

Islamic “intruders” today.3 We also have the Nakba, the catastrophe that Israeli’s founding created for 

the Palestinian people, a trauma that inspired the violently anti-Jewish and anti-Israeli struggles by 

Palestinian people and Arab states against the Zionism and the Israeli state. These polarizing, trauma-

inspired struggles have fuelled the tragic-cum-primordial narratives that prevent peace between Arabs 

and Jews in the Middle East today. 

 

 

                              An Israeli Patriot’s Lament 

In the middle of 2007, David Remnick, the editor of the New Yorker magazine, published a 

controversial “Letter from Jerusalem.” It was a conversation with Avraham Burg, once Speaker of the 

Israel Knesset and former director both of the World Zionist Organization and the Israeli Jewish 

                                                 
3 In a series of influential studies, the psychiatrist Vamik Volkan has explored such narrowing and particularistic 
responses to trauma and the manner in which they fuel violence and revenge, e.g., “Transgenerational Transmissions 
and Chosen Traumas: An Aspect of Large-Group Identity,” Group Analysis 32 (1) 2001: 79-97. From an historical 
and cultural sociological perspective, however, Volkan’s work is limited  by the individualistic and naturalizing 
assumptions that seem endemic to the psychoanalytic perspective on collective life. These problems also affect, but 
in a less restrictive manner, the wide-ranging, politically engaged studies by Dan Bar-On and his colleagues, e.g., 
Sharon Shamir, Tali Yitzhaki-Verner, and Dan Bar-On, “’The Recruited Identity’: The Influence of the Intifada on 
the Perception of the Peace Process from the Standpoint of the Individual” Journal of Narrative and Life History 6 

 

7

Agency. Remnick’s conversation with the now embittered Israeli leader points directly to the social 

processes we wish to illuminate here. “As of this moment,” Burg observes, “Israel is a state of trauma in 

nearly every one of its dimensions.” Insisting that this is “not just a theoretical question,” he asks, 

“would our ability to cope with Iran not be much better if we renewed in Israel the ability to trust the 

world?” It is because Israelis identify the Holocaust with their betrayal by Christian Europe, Burg 

reasons, that they do not possess the necessary reserve of trust that could propel a process of peace. “We 

say we do not trust the world, they will abandon us,” Burg explains. Seeing “Chamberlain returning 

from Munich with the black umbrella,” Israelis draw he conclusion “we will bomb them alone.”4  It is 

because of this trauma construction, Burg believes, that so many Israelis feel they must go it alone. He 

finds this path deeply self-defeating. “Would it not be more right,” he asks, “if we didn’t deal with the 

problem on our own but, rather, as part of a world alignment beginning with the Christian churches, 

going on to the governments and finally the armies?” 

 

In its early “optimistic years,” Burg tells Remnick, Israel was different. Paradoxically, “the 

farther we got from the camps and the gas chambers, the more pessimistic we became and the more 

untrusting we became toward the world.” As Burg see it, this narrative shift has produced chauvinism 

and selfishness. Today, the Holocaust trauma fragments and divides, allowing conservative Israelis to 

justify oppressing Palestinians. It is because of their Holocaust consciousness, Burg insists, that his 

contemporaries are not “sensitive enough to what happens to others and in many ways are too indifferent 

to the suffering of others. We confiscated, we monopolized, world suffering. We did not allow anybody 

else to call whatever suffering they have ‘holocaust’ or ‘genocide,’ be it Armenians, be it Kosovo, be it 

Darfur.” The Holocaust trauma is remembered in a manner that makes a significant swath of Israeli 

                                                                                                                                                             
(3) 1996: 193-233 and Bar-On, “Israeli Society between the Culture of Death and the Culture of Life,” Israeli 
Studies 2 (2) 1997: 88112.  
4 David Remnick, “The Apostate: A Zionist Politician Loses Faith in the Future,” The New Yorker, July 30, 2007, 
pp. 32-37. 

 

8

society impervious to criticism: “‘Occupation? You call this occupation? This is nothing compared to 

the absolute evil of the Holocaust!’ And if it is nothing compared to the Holocaust then you can 

continue. And since nothing, thank God, is comparable to the ultimate trauma it legitimizes many 

things.” 

                                        Jewish Dreams of Post-Tragedy 

 

It might have seemed, from a more naturalistic perspective, that the Holocaust would be written 

directly on the body of Israel and its Jews, whether via first-hand experience or by primordial 

identification. From a cultural-sociological perspective, however, meaning-work is contingent. For Israel 

and its Jewish people, the meaning and message of the Holocaust has been up for grabs,  crystallized in 

strikingly divergent ways. “The memory of the Holocaust and its victims,” Yechiam Weitz observes, 

“was accompanied by unending political strife;” these debates “were always bitter, full of tension and 

emotional,” and occasionally “violent and even deadly.”5  

 

The millennia long sufferings of the Jewish people created an historical memory of persecution. 

These tragic iterations were ritualized in Jewish religious ceremonies, constituting a cultural legacy that 

seemed to demand not progress but eternal return. While the post-enlightenment European emancipation 

of ghettoized Jews triggered a more progressive narrative, the backlash against Jewish incorporation that 

exploded in the last decades of the 19th century, and accelerated during the early 20th, pushed European 

Jewry to look backward again. Zionism emerged in response to this stinging disappointment. It fought 

against not only anti-Semitism but the fatalism and pessimism that so often had marked the Jewish 

tradition itself. It promised that, if a homeland were regained, the Jewish people would be landed and 

                                                 
5 Yechiam Weitz, “Political Dimensions of Holocaust memory in Israel,” pp. 129-145 in Robert Wistrich and David 
Ohana, eds., The Shaping of Israeli Identity: Myth, Memory and Trauma, London: Frank Cass, 1995, p. 130. It is 
paradoxical that in her searching and original investigation Israel’s Holocaust and the Politics of Nationhood 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005),  Idith Zertal insists on contrasting what she views as the truly 
“historical dimension of the events” with their “out-of-context use” in the new nation’s collective memory, which 
she condemns for having “transmuted” the facts (pp. 4-5). The position that informs our own approach is that history 

 

9

citied, and their history rewound. The story of the Jewish people could start over again in a healthy and 

“normal” way.6 

 

 

                     Zionist Struggles, Holocaust Memories 

This historic dream came to earth in a land peopled mostly by others. Israel’s founding did 

instantiate the progressive narrative of Zionism, but in a decidedly triumphalist and militarized manner. 

Throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries, growing Zionist settlement faced increasingly 

embittered antagonists, not only indigenous Palestinians but other, better organized Arab Muslim 

populations.7 Could the Zionists have understood their potential opponents in anything other than an 

antagonistic way? In fact, different sorts of relations were possible, and some were tried. Of course, the 

options narrowed substantially after the murder of six million. The heinous event gave an extraordinary 

urgency to the Jewish exodus from Europe, both inside and outside the Jewish community itself. The 

British folded up their Mandate and the UN declared a fragile, and almost universally unpopular, two-

state solution. Even then, however, there was more than one path to take. Despite their territorial 

ambitions, the more left-wing, socialist, and democratic Israeli fighters conducted their struggles in less 

violent and pugnacious, more civilly-regulated ways. Right-wing Zionists, epitomized by the notorious 

Stern Gang, were more aggressively violent, demonstrating much less concern for non-Jewish life, 

whether British, Arab, Palestinian, Muslim or Christian.8  

                                                                                                                                                             
is never accessible as such. To make it seem so is to provide resources for the kind of ideology critique in which 
Zertal is so powerfully engaged.  
6 For an account of this emancipation, its fateful disappointments, and the rise of Zionism as one among several 
Jewish responses , see Jeffrey C. Alexander, The Civil Sphere, New York: Oxford University Press, 2006, chapter 
18.  The idea of returning to Jerusalem had, of course, long been an essential idiom of diasporic Judaism.  
7 For an account of this situation, see Rashid Khalidi, Palestinian Identity: The Construction of Modern 
Consciousness. New York: Columbia University Press, 1997. 
8 For a synthetic account of the significant contrast between the mentalities and fighting strategies of the left and 
right-wing Jewish forces fighting for the creation of the Jewish state, see Ian J. Bickerton and Carl L. Klausner, A 
Concise History of the Arab-Israeli Conflict, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2002 (4th edition), 
especially pp. 100-115. 

 

10

 

Amidst the chaotic conditions and competing ambitions of this postwar struggle, Israel declared 

its independence, the Arab states and Palestinians declared and acted upon their opposition, and the 

historical options narrowed further still. Zionist forces engaged in pitched battles against local 

Palestinian fighters and invading Arab armies.  Jewish soldiers individually, and the emerging Jewish 

nation collectively, experienced this birth struggle as a matter of life or death. “We, the Jewish Israelis,” 

the psychiatrist Dan Bar-on recalled, “saw ourselves as surrounded by enemies and having to struggle, 

physically and mentally, for our lives and survival.”9 Making an analogy with the Holocaust, the only 

recently terminated and extraordinarily searing experience of racially-motivated mass murder, Israeli 

individuals and their nation identified themselves as victims. Feelings of compassion for displaced 

Palestinians -- who were equally endangered, and most directly by Israeli’s own army -- were cast aside.  

                                       Trauma and Primordialty 

 

The Israeli state, established upon the blood sacrifice of its courageous but also ethnically 

cleansing army, honored its soldier-martyrs and inscribed in historical memory the trauma-inspired 

lesson that only military strength could prevent Jewish defilement and murder from ever happening 

again.10 For the new nation’s first two decades, the historical record shows, the school textbooks of 

                                                 
9 Bar-On 1997, p. 90.  
10 For many contemporary friends of Israel – and we count ourselves among them -- such a characterization may 
appear harsh.  It seems to us, however, the ineluctable conclusion from two decades of Israel’s own deeply 
revisionist , self-critical historiography. As such writers as Benny Morris (The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee 
Problem, 1947-1949, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987) and  Ilan Pappe (The Making of the Arab-
Israeli Conflcit, 1947-51, London: I.B. Tauris, 1992) have documented in painstaking and painful empirical detail, 
the Independence conflict involved not just Palestinian residents’ voluntary flight but massive, Israeli-instigated 
population transfers, pushing hundreds of thousands of Palestinians off their land and wiping out the Palestinian 
identities of  hundreds of once-Arab villages. None of this is to say that the historical events triggered by the UN’s 
two-state resolution were inevitable, nor is it to absolve the Palestinian and Arab parties of their own fateful 
responsibilities. For a collection of archival-based essays by Arab and Jewish scholars exploring this complex and 
deeply contradictory period, see Eugene L. Rogan and Avi Shlaim, eds., The War for Palestine: Rewriting the 
History of 1948, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. The collection is also notable for Edward Said’s 
“Afterward: The Consequences of 1948” (pp. 206-219). In one of the radical Palestinian critic’s last published 
essays, he lashes out at the repressive, anti-Semitic, and militaristic conditions that, in his view, had marked so much 
of Arab and Palestinian political and cultural life during the post-Independence period. For an insightful overview of 
the polarizing, if delayed, effects of Israeli’s “history wars” over its collective identity – and an argument that it is 
psychologically overdetermined – see Jose Brunner, “Contentious Origins: Psychoanalytic Comments on the Debate 

 

11

Israeli children were filled with deeply polluting descriptions of Arabs as savage, sly, cheat, thief, 

robber, provocateur, and terrorist. As one Israeli historian has suggested, during these early decades the 

national narrative hewed closely to the “tradition of depicting Jewish history as an uninterrupted record 

of anti-Semitism and persecution.”11 The continuing Arab military campaign against Israel was 

represented inside this frame. Palestinian violence was analogized with pre-Independence ‘pogroms’ 

against Jews, and Palestinian and Arab leaders were depicted as only the most recent in “a long line of 

‘oppressors’ of Jews during the course of their history.”12 

 

Insofar as this trauma-construction conceived Israeli’s origin as an iteration of the Jewish 

Holocaust experience, an aggressive and military response to the “Palestinian problem” became the only 

conceivable “solution” to the subjective fears of Israelis and the objective dangers that a series of Arab 

attacks posed to their nation. And, indeed, so long as military power seemed a viable method of wiping 

the historical slate clean, even the progressive narrative of democratic Zionism was deeply 

compromised, linking “bereavement and triumph” in an inward turning, particularistic way.13 When 

Holocaust Day was officially declared in 1951, it was not considered a major event, its tragic narration 

sitting uncomfortably alongside Zionism’s future-oriented founding myth. One effort at metonymic 

                                                                                                                                                             
over Israeli’s Creation,” in John Bunzl and Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi, eds., Psychoanalysis, Identity, and Ideology: 
Critical Essays on the Israel/Palestine Case, Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002, pp. 107-135.  
11 Elie Podeh, “History and Memory in the Israeli Educational System: The Portrayal of the Arab-Israeli Conflict in 
History Textbooks (1948-2000),” History and Memory 12 (1) 2000: 65-100, quoting pp. 75-6. 
 
12 Ibid. This specifically Israeli-Jewish frame complemented the more broadly polluting binary of Western 
orientalism. Though sweeping and polemical,  Said was not wrong when he suggested, thirty years ago in The 
Palestinian Question, that “between Zionism and the West there was and still is a community of language and of 
ideology [that] depends heavily on a remarkable tradition in the West of enmity toward Islam in particular and the 
Orient in general.” Asserting that Arabs were “practically the only ethnic about whom in the West racial slurs are 
tolerated, even encouraged,” Said suggested that “the Arabs and Islam represent viciousness, veniality, degenerate 
vice, lechery, and stupidity in popular and scholarly discourse” (The Question of Palestine, New York: Times 
Books, 1979, p. 26, original italics). 
13 Avner Ben-Amos and Illana Bet-El, “Holocaust Day and Memorial Day in Israeli Schools: Ceremonies, 
Education and History, Israeli Studies 4 (1) 1999: 258-284, quoting p. 267.  See also Yoram Bilu and Eliezer 
Witztum, “War-Related Loss and Suffering in Israeli Society: An Historical Perspective,” Israeli Studies 5 (2) 2000: 
1-31; Doron Bar, “Holocaust Commemoration in Israel during the 1950s: The Holocaust Cellar on Mount Zion,” 
Jewish Social Studies: History,Culture, Society, n.s. 12 (1) 2005: 16-38; and Dalia Ofer, “The Strength of 

 

12

resolution placed Holocaust Day one week before the Memorial and Independence Day sequence, in the 

period that followed upon the Passover celebration of Jewish enslavement and emancipation.14 The 

Holocaust holiday, in other words, pointed backward and forward at the same time, and in both 

directions remained resolutely particularistic. In its tragic mode, it mourned “the modern attempt to 

annihilate the Jewish people;” in its progressive mode, it celebrated the Warsaw Ghetto uprising as “the 

heroic spark” that had reignited Israel’s birth.15   

 

In fact, constructing parallels between the Holocaust and Israeli wars was more than a 

metonymic matter. Strong metaphorical resemblances were established between the holidays marking 

them as well. On the eve of both holidays, businesses, coffee shops and cinemas close early. Radio 

stations replace their regular broadcasting schedules with melancholic Israeli songs, and television 

channels feature documentaries about the Holocaust and the Israeli wars. Schools devote these holy days 

to commemoration and hold compulsory memorial ceremonies. Although these ceremonies are planned 

and conducted by representatives of the student body, they closely resemble one another, for drawing 

upon from the same limited, iconic cultural corpus. Many of the same poems are recited, many of the 

same songs are sung, similar imagery is projected, and parallel dress codes are required. A state 

ceremony is broadcasted live through most public TV and radio stations on both days16.  Another feature 

the holidays share is the sirens that provide temporal and  moral  demarcation. "On the appointed 

minute, and for one minute's duration, siren blasts shriek in every village, town and city in the land. 

                                                                                                                                                             
Remembrance: Commeorating the Holocaust During the First Decade of Israel,”Jewish Social Studies 6 (2) 2000: 
29-38. 
14 Cf., Zertal, op. cit., p. 39 and Don Handelman and Elihu Katz, "State Ceremonies of Israel-Remembrance Day and 
Independence Day" in D. Handelman, Models and Mirrors: Towards Anthropology of Public Events, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990, pp. 191-233. Handelman and Katz interpret this juxtaposition as having 
suggested that, for the Israelis, Holocaust Day signified an exit from the suffering of diasporic Jewry, framing the 
tragedy, in a progressive manner, as adumbrating the emergence of the Jewish state.  
15 Ben-Amos and Bet-El,  p. 272. 
16 Handelman and Katz, pp. 192-195. 

 

13

Human life stands still, people stop in their tracks, vehicles stop in mid-intersection… All is silent."17 

This siren, which in other contexts and with different modulation serves as an air-raid warning, not only 

enforces the short period of shared commemoration; it also emphasizes the incorporation of the victims 

of the Holocaust into the Jewish-Israeli collectivity.18 

 

At the heart of the Independence Day ritual is a binary that contrasts the “passive Diaspora 

Jewry” of the pre-Holocaust period – “sheep to the slaughter” – with the “active Zionism” of post-

Holocaust Israel, “which had fought successfully for statehood.” For its part, the Holocaust memorial 

day ceremonies are often accompanied by a similar pairing. Such phrases as "from Holocaust to 

Heroism" and "from Holocaust to Revival/Establishment"19 signify a Zionist chronology that leads from 

Holocaust in the Diaspora to Jewish revival via the establishment of modern Israel. These binaries 

inspire a progressive narrative according to which “resistance fighters … and soldiers in the War of 

Independence became the protagonists of the ceremony.” It was via such a political-cum-cultural 

process that youthful Israel, in Bar-On’s words, “crossed the fragile distinction from being morally right 

as a persecuted people” – for whom “persecution became imbedded in our internal representations 

throughout the ages of the Diaspora” -- to being a dominant and aggressive military power, one which 

did not “attempt to include the relevant 'other' but rather to ignore or disgorge him.”20  

 

This construction of a causal relationship between the Holocaust and Israeli wars was dramatized 

in a closely watched and influential television series. "Pillar of Fire” first aired in 1981 on what was then 

the nation’s only television channel, the government run Channel 1. This series narrates the history of 

the Jewish people in the first half of the 20th century from a distinctively Zionist perspective, 

                                                 
17 ibid, p. 193. 
18 As Zertal notes, it has been proposed that all six million Jewish casualties be granted Israeli citizenships, see Idit 
Zertal, Death and the Nation: History, Memory, Politics [Hebrew]. Or Yehuda: Dvir Publishing House, 2002: p. 16.  
19 The Hebrew phrase "M'shoah L'tkuma" is polysemic. The word "Tkuma" can be translated both as revival and as 
establishment (specifically regarding the establishment of the state of Israel). 
20 Amir et al, “Recruited Identity,” p. 195.  

 

14

encapsulating what later come to be criticized as the hegemonic Israeli narrative.21 “Pillars of Fire” led 

the viewer from the tragedy of the Final Solution to the heroic Warsaw Ghetto Uprising; from there to 

the Jewish Brigades, which volunteered to serve in the British army and assist the Allied forces in their 

war against Germany; onward towards the struggle of the Zionist leadership against the British forces 

who prevented Jews from immigrating to Palestine; concluding with Israel’s the declaration of 

independence and the ensuing war with the Arab nations.  

 

This historical account rests upon a self-justifying, narrowly particularistic, and deeply 

primordial reconstruction of the Holocaust trauma, one that has continued to exert great influence today. 

The Jewish fighters are the protagonists of this drama. Arrayed against them is the long list of their 

historical antagonists: the Germans and their accomplices; the British, who stood between Jewish 

refugees and the soon-to-be Israelis; the Allied Forces, who intervened too late and failed to save 

European Jews from the Final Solution; Arab-Palestinians and the surrounding nations, who opposed the 

establishment of the Jewish State; and Europeans, who resented the Jewish survivors and greeted their 

return to their original residences with several post-war Pogroms. The binary of Jew and Gentile, a 

defining characteristic of most Jewish communities since biblical times, is thus reformulated inside the 

Zionist narrative. Instead of leading, as it did in earlier times, to social seclusion, on the one hand, and 

moral calls for a more just and universal order, on the other, the new Jewish-Israeli narrative reinforces 

the militaristic and exclusionary aspects of Zionism. Foreign nations have proven to be untrustworthy. 

Israel can rely only on the resources of the Jewish people and its own military strength to defend itself. 

                                       Shifting Constructions,  New Sympathies 

 

Only later, as Israel became more embattled and militarized Zionism stymied and wounded, did 

this ambiguous and narrow reconstruction of the Jewish nation’s founding began to falter. It is revealing 

                                                 
21 Amit M. Shejter, "'The Pillar of Fire by Night, to Shew them Light." Media, Culture & Society, n.s. 29(6) 2007: 
916-933. 

 

15

that Holocaust Day became more culturally significant as the trauma-drama framing it became more 

insistently pessimistic, and there were a series of symbolic developments that contributed to darkening 

before the social arena for the performance of militarized Zionism actually change. For example, the 

trial of Adolf Eichmann, a Nazi official publicly tried for war crimes in 1961, exposed the Israeli public 

to a multitude of testimonies which brought to light the horrendous war experiences of Holocaust 

survivors. After more than a decade in which the personal stories were belittled in favor of the collective 

progressive narrative, these relived testimonies set in motion a new, more privatizing Holocaust 

memory. Not only a national disaster brought on by the passiveness of Diasporic Jewry, the Holocaust 

now became a collection of personal tragedies, to be sympathized with, commemorated, and also 

avenged.22  

 

This turn toward tragedy deepened after the Yom Kippur war in 1973, when Israel barely 

escaped a catastrophic military defeat. With this event, the social arena for the performance of collective 

trauma was changed. The war experience allowed the particularistic approach to the identities at stake to 

be challenged in a subtle but powerful way. A newly experienced “feeling of dread,” according to a 

contemporary Israeli observer, meant “diminished importance of the fighter as a Zionist role model” and 

the corresponding reconstruction of the Holocaust drama in a manner – complementary to the post-

Eichman privatization -- that “placed a bolder emphasis on the suffering of the victims and focused 

greater attention on daily life in the ghettoes and camps.” As a consequence, “a different type of bravery 

was now given prominence – one that was non-military, but involved survival under oppressive 

conditions.”23  

                                                 
22 For an elaborate discussion of the privatization of the Holocaust memory in Israeli society, see Anita Shapira, 
"The Holocaust: Private Memories, Public Memories." Jewish Social Studies 4(2), 1998, pp. 40-58. 
23 Ben-Amos and Bet-El, p. 270. Bilu and Witztum note, for example, that the psychiatric diagnosis of Post-
Traumatic-Stress-Disorder could only emerge in the wake of the Yom Kippur war, for it implied a weakening of the 
indomitable Israeli protagonist’s military strength: “The myth of heroism, and with it the layers of disregard and 
denial that had hidden combat stress reactions from the public eye in the preceding wars, were extensively eroded in 
the 1973 War. Following the utter surprise and confusion at the onset of the war, the military defeats in the first days 

 

16

 

It is from this point onward that the enduring conflict between more particularizing and more 

universalizing constructions of the Jewish trauma-drama became crystallized inside Israeli society. Of 

course, a sense of victimhood continued to permeate political discourse in Israel’s third decade. The Six-

Day War of 1967, the 1967-1970 War of Attrition, the Munich Massacre of 1972, the Entebbe Operation 

of 1976, and the punctuating acts of terrorism undertaken by the Palestine Liberation Organization left 

deep marks on Israeli society, becoming frequent trauma-recalling and trauma-inducing features of 

public discourse. Conservative Prime Minister Menachem Begin made prominent use of Holocaust 

imagery in his political speeches, warning time and again against the "return of Auschwitz" in reference 

to threats from the Palestinians and Arab nations. The leading Labor politician Abba Eban famously 

compared the option of a return to the pre-1967 borders of Israel to a return to the borders of 

Auschwitz.24 When speaking of the Arab-Israeli conflict, soldiers and politicians frequently expressed 

concerns about a Holocaust-like disaster looming over their heads25. Such narrative inscriptions of 

Holocaust tragedy inside the long-suffering history of Jewish suffering provided further justification for 

violent resistance against those were perceived as purely external threats. 

 

The new post-1973 context, however, also allowed the tragic trauma construction to provide a 

different kind of script, one that could connect Jewish Israelis with Palestinian suffering. An Israeli 

peace movement emerged that put land for peace on the table, and a new generation of critical historians 

righteously exposed Israeli complicity in Palestinian expulsion.  Leftist intellectuals introduced such 

                                                                                                                                                             
of fighting, and the heavy toll of casualties – more than 2500 soldiers killed and about 7000 wounded – the war was 
inscribed in the national consciousness as a massive trauma” (loc. cit., p. 20). 
24 For a detailed account of this change in the Israeli attitude towards the memory of the Holocaust, see Hanna 
Yablonka, "The Holocaust Consciousness in the Third Decade: From 'There' to 'Here and Now'," in Z. Zameret and 
H. Yablonka, eds., The Third Decade [Hebrew], Jerusalem: Yad Ben Zvi, 2008, pp. 364-378. 
25 A collection of testimonies and experiences from the Six-Day War provides numerous examples: A. Shapira, ed., 
Warriors' Discourse: Chapters in Listening and Meditation [Siyach Lochamim: Pirkey Hakshava Vehitbonenut] 
[Hebrew], Tel Aviv: Kvutzat Chaverim Tzeirim Mehatnua Hakibutzit, 1968, pp. 160-170. 

 

17

new critical concepts as “cognitive militarism.”26 More moderate observers spoke about the decline of 

“collective commemoration” and the growth of a more individual centered, rights-based political 

culture.27  

 

The “devaluation of the myth of heroism”28 intensified after the 1982 Lebanon War, whose 

military frustrations produced feelings of futility and whose massacres at Sabra and Shatila ignited 

feelings of humiliation. In its initial response to the massacres, conservative Likud government officials 

lashed out against accusations of Israeli complicity. They described them as "a blood libel against the 

Jewish state and its Government,” framing them in terms of historical anti-Semitism against the Jewish 

people.  In response to this defensive and narrowly primordial construction, some 300,000 Israelis 

organized a massive protest in Tel Aviv. This unprecedented expression of criticisms and anti-war 

feeling triggered the creation of a Commission of Inquiry. Chaired by former Supreme Court Justice 

Yitzhak Kahan, the investigation produced sharply critical findings and made significant 

recommendations for reform. While it was Lebanese Phalangists who had carried out the massacre 

against Palestinians, the Kahan Commission found that the Jewish government had “indirect personal 

responsibility” and accused Ariel Sharon, then Minister of Defense, of “direct personal responsibility.”29 

The events surrounding the Lebanon invasion and the self-critical reaction to it not only created more 

universalizing trauma constructions inside Israel. They  triggered also a global reaction that, according 

to one French observer, allowed the normative symbolization of Holocaust “to be turned against those to 

whom it hitherto protected.” For the first time, “large swathes of international public opinion distanced 

                                                 
26 Victor Azarya and Baruch Kimmerling "Cognitive Permeability of Civil-Military Boundaries: Expectations from 
Military Service inIsrael," Studies in Comparative International Development. 20 (4) 1985-86: 42-63; Kimmerling, 
"Patterns of Militarism in Israel," European Journal of Sociology 2 (1993): 1-28 and "Political Subcultures and 
Civilian Militarism in A Settler-Immigrant Society," in D. Bar-Tal, D. Jacobson and A. Kliemann, eds., Concerned 
with Security: Learning from Israel's Experience, Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press, 1998, pp. 395-416.  
27 Bilu and Witztum, p. 25. 
28 Ibid., p. 23. 
29 Kahan Commission, Israeli’s Lebanon War, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1984, pp. 283-84. 

 

18

themselves from the policy of Israel.”30 Two decades later, the Israeli feminist critic Ronit Lentin 

asserted that this new spiral of signification had made an expanded solidarity possible. 

After Lebanon, for the first time, the suffering of others, particularly of Palestinian children, not 

Jewish suffering, was the principal subject of Israeli literary and poetic discourses. The death of 

Palestinians was described using Shoah images; their fate was equated with the fate of the Jews 

as Israeli poets and playwrights reflected and compelled Jewish understanding of the suffering of 

the Palestinians31.  

                           Palestinian Counter-Narrative of Trauma 

 

Throughout this period of symbolic reconstruction, the emergent Palestinian national movement 

played a significant role, creating new “realities on the ground” that provided a new dramatic field of 

performative possibilities. Its energetic and aggressive ideology, and often murderous tactics, presented 

undeniable evidence of a previously “invisible” nation and people, making it more difficult, though not 

of course impossible, to narrate a progressive story of emancipation on the Israeli side. Yet, the PLO’s 

terrorism severely restricted its dramatic appeal. In the late 1970s, the world’s best known Palestinian 

intellectual, Edward Said, declared that, while “we have gained the support of all the peoples of the 

Third World,” the “remarkable national resurgence” of the “Palestinian idea” had not yet succeeded, for 

“we have been unable to interest the West very much in the justice of our cause.”32 While 

acknowledging how much he resented “the ways in which the whole grisly matter is stripped of all its 

resonances and its often morally confusing detail, and compressed simply, comfortably, inevitably under 

the rubric of ‘Palestinian terror’,” Said declared himself “horrified at the hijacking of planes, the suicidal 

                                                 
30 Michel Wieviorka, The Lure of Anti-Semitism: Hatred of Jews in Present-Day France, Leiden/Boston: Brill, 
2007, p. 59. 
31 Ronit Lentin, Israel and the Daughters of the Shoah: Reoccupying the Territories of Silence. New York: 
Berghahn Books, 2000, p. 145.   The empathy-creating possibilities of Holocaust memory  is ignored by Zertal’s 
reconstruction, whose cultural history has no place for the peace movement. 
32 Said, The Palestinian Question, pp. xi-x, original italics. 

 

19

missions, the assassinations, the bombing of schools and hotels.” Said believed that this performative 

failure would have to be redressed. In order to attract a Western audience, the trauma-drama of 

Palestinian suffering would have to be told in a different way. For there to be “some sense of the larger 

Palestinian story from which all these things came,” Said explained, there must be a new and more 

compelling focus on “the reality of a collective national trauma [that is] contained for every Palestinian 

in the question of Palestine.”33 A new progressive counter-trauma narrative was projected, describing 

Palestinian suffering, Western/Israeli domination, and a heroic anti-colonial movement for liberation. It 

provided a new symbolic protagonist with whom a widening circle of Western citizens, and the 

developing group of self-critical Israelis, could identify, or at least ambivalently support. This possibility 

deepened among many Israelis in the wake of the first Intifada, the relatively non-violent Palestinian 

uprising that began in 1987. The expanding structure of solidary feeling became powerfully 

institutionalized in the treaties and ceremonies marking the Oslo peace process in 1993.  

                                             Right-Wing  Backlash 

 

What has been described as the emergence of “post-Zionism” was constrained, though  not 

entirely cut short, by the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin in 1995.34 Rabin’s cruelly 

calculated murder managed to short-circuit processes of civil repair that had, in no small part, been 

fuelled by the manner which the Holocaust trauma specifically, and Jewish suffering more generally, 

was being symbolically and morally recast. This murderous short-circuiting demonstrated the 

ambiguous and contradictory trauma construction that responded to Israeli’s post-1967 history. While 

the earlier, more particularistic trauma drama had been challenged, its narrowly primordial power had 

certainly remained. There is no inherent correlation between narrative form and moral aspiration. 

Indeed, even as the Yom Kippur war and the difficulties that unfolded in its aftermath allowed the 

                                                 
33 Ibid., p. xii. 
34 See, e.g., Erik Cohen, “Israel as a Post-Zionist Society,” pp. 203-213 in Wistrich and Ohana, loc. cit. 

 

20

creation of a more universalizing tragic narrative, they also energized a much more particularistic kind 

of tragic story, one that was distinctively more anti-civil than the Israeli nation’s ambiguously 

progressive founding myth. And even as the emerging Palestinian movement provided opportunities for 

cross-national solidarity, it also had an equal and opposite effect. Alongside and competing with the 

Palestinian protagonist with whom the left could identify,  Palestinian actions offered the growing 

backlash movement a more sharply defined, polluted antagonist against whom to carry on Israel’s long-

standing primordial fight.  

 

In 1977, the right-wing Likud party took power on a platform demanding continued occupation 

and usurpation of the “holy lands,” its leaders and supporters fervently opposed to any Palestinian 

accord. During this of backlash movement there also emerged Gush Emunim – literally “Block of the 

Faithful” -- whose supporters began a decades long, highly successful campaign to take Jewish 

possession of occupied Palestinian lands. The religious Zionist ideology initially inspiring Gush 

Emunim was not militarist. Emerging in response to the seemingly “miraculous” 1967 war, it narrated 

the acquisition of Judea, Samaria and Sinai – which had taken just six days -- as a millennial sign of the 

Jewish people’s imminent salvation. In opposition to the traditional views of Orthodox Judaism, for 

Gush Emunim building, settling and developing – whether in pre-war Israel or in the Occupied 

Territories – became a positively sanctioned commandment. The movement’s activity’s soon generated 

intense opposition nonetheless. Illegal settlements were forcibly removed time and again, only to be 

reinstated by Gush Emunim. Public opinion remained largely unsupportive, the expected salvation did 

not arrive, and Egyptian-Israeli peace accord forced withdrawal from Sinai and the first massive 

settlement removal in 1982. Its messianic aspirations thwarted, Gush Emunim turned from messianic to 

militaristic narrations of expanded settlement as a result.35   

                                                 
35 For an elaborate account of the first years of Gush Emunim and of the religious and political context out of which 
it had emerged see Gideon Aran, From Religious Zionism to a Zionist Religion: The Roots of Gush Emunim and its 

 

21

            In the years that followed, “settler” became as ubiquitous a trope in conservative Israeli society 

as “survivor.” Indeed, the former collective representation drew its symbolic strength from the latter. For 

the Israeli right, Jews needed desperately to annex every inch of Palestinian land that surrounded them, 

for every non-Jewish person was a potential enemy. They had learned this deeply anti-civil lesson from 

their tragic, and primordial, reconstruction of the Holocaust trauma. Because they experienced the 

Jewish victimhood of those terrible days as never having gone away, they could glean no bridging 

metaphors from their re-experience of trauma. Instead, they felt compelled to frame every conflict with 

outsiders in a boundary-making way.  

 

When the Likud Minister of Education delivered her Holocaust Day speech on 2001, she 

proclaimed complete identification with the protagonists in the original trauma. “We shouldn’t 

suppose,” she insisted, “that we differ from our grandfathers and grandparents who went to the gas 

chambers.” Rejecting a progressive narrative that would dramatize the distance between the situation of 

Jews then and now, she insisted “what separates us from them is not that we are some sort of new Jew.” 

What has changed is not the opposition between Jew and Gentile, but its asymmetry. The Jewish side 

can now be armed. The Minister explained: “The main difference is external: we have a state, a flag and 

army.” During the historical Holocaust, by contrast, the Jews had been “caught in their tragedy, [for] 

                                                                                                                                                             
Culture [Hebrew].Thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Jerusalem: Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, 1987. The turn from a messianic religious discourse to a militaristic discourse in the political culture of 
Gush Emunim was pointed out in Gadi Taub, The Settlers and the Battle for the Meaning of Zionism [Hebrew], Tel 
Aviv: Miskal, 2007.  If the polarizing effects of the Israeli trauma drama’s shifting retellings were deepened by more 
“fundamentalist,” and often more eschatological, versions of Jewish religion, the same can be said for the 
Palestinian trauma. More radical and rejectionist elements, publicly dedicated to the annihilation of Israel, 
increasingly experienced the sources of their trauma, and its possible resolution, through Islamicist faith.  For this 
intertwining of the religious extremes, see Roger Friedland and Richard Hecht, To Rule Jerusalem, New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996, e.g., pp. 168-170 and 355ff. 
 

 

22

they lacked all three.”36 The trauma drama points toward an ineluctable solution: It is only power and 

violence that can save contemporary Jews from suffering their ancestors’ fate.  

 

Caught up inside this narrowly constructed trauma drama, the Israeli right has identified the 

peace process with Jewish annihilation. In the months before Yitzhak Rabin’s assassination, ultra-

orthodox and right-wing magazines attacked the general-turned-peacemaker as a “traitor” and 

“madman,” suggesting he was “anti-religious” and even “non-Jewish.” He and his Foreign Minister, 

Shimon Peres, were depicted as members of the Judenrat and Kapos, the infamous Nazi-appointed 

Jewish leaders who had collaborated in the administration of the death camps. At the anti-government 

demonstrations that grew increasingly aggressive in the months and weeks before his murder, Rabin was 

portrayed in posters wearing an SS uniform and cap. 37  

 

These disturbing images point to the construction of a trauma drama that is increasingly radical 

and particularist. Mainstream Zionism casts Israeli Jews as protagonists and Arabs as antagonists. The 

new conception marks Israeli settlers as victims, and any political or military party which attempts to 

evict them as Nazis. This trauma rhetoric framed resistance to the first large-scale eviction of Israeli 

settlers, from the Sinai as part of the peace agreement with Egypt in 1982. In the final clash between the 

settlers and Israeli military forces who forcibly removed them, the settlers placed yellow stars on their 

chests, echoing the emblems that European Jews had been forced to wear under Nazi occupation. 

 

Since 1982, the settlement movement has grown considerably not only in size but influence. In 

the 2005 "Disengagement," Israeli forces withdrew unilaterally from the Gaza Strip and Northern 

Samaria, and 25 settlements were dismantled. These powerful challenges to the anti-Palestinian land 

movement triggered more intense invocations of the Holocaust trauma in response. Soldiers sent to 

                                                 
36 Limor Livnat, “Of Holocaust and Heroism,” Ha’aretz, April 19, 2001, quoted in Jackie Feldman, “Marking the 
Boundaries of the Enclave: Defining the Israeli Collective through the Poland Experience,” Israeli Studies 7 (2) 
2002: 1-31, p. 1.  
37 Lentin, loc. cit., p. 148.  

 

23

forcibly evict settlements were met with sobbing children wearing yellow stars, asking with raised hands 

"Have you come to take us to the gas chamber?" Settlers prepared Auschwitz-like uniforms to be worn 

on eviction day. Right-wing activists broadly referred to soldiers and Israeli leaders as Judenrat, which 

drew censure from Holocaust survivors and left-wing political activists alike.38 The mainstream Zionist 

invocation of the Holocaust trauma drama justified anti-Arab and anti-Palestinian violence in the name 

of creating and defending Israel. The right-wing pro-settlement variation on this theme understands such 

violence differently, as an act of defiance. As the Nazis obliterated Jewish communities in Europe, so 

are Israeli leaders planning to destroy the Jewish communities in the Occupied Territories.  

                                             Left-Wing Inhibition 

 

Faced with such powerfully reactionary trauma constructions, the response of the left would 

seem clear. Drawing upon the relatively autonomous cultural power of Holocaust symbolism, it could 

challenge the social instantiations upon which right-wing deployments of the narrative rest. Building 

upon the earlier peace movement, it could broaden solidarity by identifying the Palestinians as the 

victims of a Holocaust-like disaster themselves. That such counter-narratives only rarely appear in the 

highly polarized political conflicts that mark contemporary Israel, even among fierce opponents of the 

settlement movement, is not only a politically debilitating but an empirically perplexing fact.  

 

Western critics of Israel’s occupation policy, whether Jewish or not, do not share this difficulty. 

In the 2008 animated pseudo-documentary “Waltz with Bashir,” Israeli journalist Ron Ben-Yshay 

recounts his arrival at Sabra and Shatilla at the massacre’s end. "Do you remember the photo from the 

Warsaw Ghetto? The one with the kid raising his hands?" he asks his interviewer. The next shot shows a 

group of Palestinian women and children raising their hands while being led by gun-bearing Phalangists 

to their certain deaths. The following shot is a close up of one of this group of victims, a solemn child of 

                                                 
38 "The Difficult Scenes which will never Relent" [Hebrew], Maariv, August 8, 2005; "Moving to a New Home is 
not Similar to Crematoriums and Gas Chambers" [Hebrew], Maariv, December 21, 2004; "Settlers: We'll Greet the 

 

24

approximately the same age as the Jewish child from the Warsaw Ghetto. This potently inverted analogy 

strongly appeals to critical audiences outside of Israel. “Waltz with Bashir” was nominated for an 

Academy Award.  Such inversion, however, rarely surfaces inside Jewish-Israeli discourse itself.  

 

Post-Zionist scholars have certainly deconstructed the once widely accepted causal relationship 

between the Holocaust and the establishment of Israel. They have challenged the Zionist founder’s claim 

that the establishment of Israel was the only possible response to the Holocaust and the only feasible 

solution to the anti-Semitism of the Diaspora.39 While these radical arguments have not been universally 

accepted among critical Israelis, they reveal the widespread identification of the Israeli left with the 

suffering of the Palestinians.  

 

Yet, when speaking out publicly against the occupation, critical Israelis rarely evoke rhetorical 

solidarity with Palestinians. When Holocaust imagery is employed, it is directed inwards, towards 

Jewish-Israeli leaders and institutions, identifying them as anti-Palestinian “perpetrators.” Philosopher 

Yeshayahu Leibowitz publicly called Israeli military units "Judeo-Nazis." 40 Historian Moshe 

Zimmerman asserted that his ability to study extremist settlers was limited because the Jewish children 

of occupied Hebron resemble Hitler Youth. The Leibowitz interview became notorious. Zimmerman 

was sued for libel.41 In a similar incident, scandal erupted and legal proceedings ensued over a letter 

addressed to a settler in "KZ Kiryat Arba," widely understood as “Concentration Camp Kiryat Arba,” an 

identification that clearly equated Jewish settlement with Nazi Holocaust crimes. While acknowledging 

that "doubtlessly, the defendant intended to claim that the plaintiff is an evil man,” the presiding judge in 

the case adamantly maintained that, no matter how evil the settler seemed, the defendant could not have 

                                                                                                                                                             
Soldiers in Auschwitz Uniforms" [Hebrew], Yediot Aharonot, July 28, 2005. 
39 Moshe Zimmerman, "'Post-Zionism' and Post-Zionism' [Hebrew], Theory and Criticism 12-13: 487-496. 
40 "Yeshayahu Leibowitz, 91, Iconoclastic Israeli Thinker." New York Times, August 19, 1994. 
41 The statement was originally published in Moshe Zimmerman, "The Children of Hebron Resemble Hitler Youth." 
[Hebrew] Jerusalem April 28, 1995. Court proceedings in this matter are in Civil Complaint (Tel Aviv) 2313/00 
Zimmermann vs. Yedioth Communication Inc., 2005 [Hebrew]. 

 

25

intended to link him with Nazism -- “He did not mean to say that the plaintiff is, God forbid, a Nazi.” 

The judge’s reasoning underscores the difficulty of universalizing the Holocaust trauma in Israel today. 

“As a Jew,” he explained, “the plaintiff cannot be anything but a victim of the Nazis."42  

 

There are several reasons for this discursive inhibition. One undoubtedly is that Israel’s inability 

to come to terms with the Palestinian question has produced increasing radicalism, violence, and anti-

Israeli, and often anti-Semitic stereotypes among a significant part of the Palestinian resistance. Another, 

less noted reason has to do with the centrality of the army in Israeli society. Most Israeli Jews, both men 

and women, have compulsory military duty of two to three years starting at the age of 18. Many 

voluntarily extend their service to gain benefits and professional development, and most remain in 

reserve duty until the age of 40. To severely criticize the military by comparing it to the bitterest 

antagonist in modern Jewish history is to pollute not only the military per se but, indirectly, the whole of 

Israeli society. Institutional setting plays a vital role in trauma construction, filtering and tilting the spiral 

of signification. 

 

Whatever the causes, the result of this constraint on the signification process has been to deprive 

Israeli critics of a potent political weapon. Criticizing the intertwining of Holocaust and national 

founding narrative as a forced marriage, post-Zionists generally avoid evoking the trauma drama in any 

political context. This has allowed the meaning of the Holocaust to be monopolized by nationalist and 

conservative forces.  

 

According to the Israeli right, to recognize the rights of Palestinians is to become an 

enemy of the Jewish people. Solidarity cannot extend beyond the boundaries of one’s own group. 

It must be primordial, not civil. So reconstructed, the trauma drama of the Holocaust is a recipe 

for conflict without end. If this view should prevail, it would not only be severely destabilizing in 

                                                 
42 Civil Complaint (Jerusalem) 552/84 Haetzni vs. Tomarkin, 1986 [Hebrew]. 

 

26

geo-political terms. It would assault the universalizing moral principles that the memory of the 

Holocaust calls upon us to sustain.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Cultural Trauma of Katyn Massacre 

Ron Eyerman and Dominik Bartmanski 

Yale University 

 

“The worst was the silence, the prohibition against speaking openly of their death, of a dignified 

burial, for half a century. It was forbidden even to visit the places of execution. My younger 

sister, Zosia, always envied those friends of hers whose parents had died in Auschwitz. They at 

least could go to the grave sites, and didn’t have to hide the truth…” 

       Stanislawa Dec quoted in Children of the Katyn Massacre Teresa Kaczorowska Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & 

Company 2006:150.  

“The Katyn massacre is the only international crime in world history where two nations disputed 

U.S. Congressman Ray Madden 1952, cited in Katyn and the Soviet Massacre of 1940 George Sanford London: 

Routledge 2005:124.  

the guilt”  

 

 

27

ABSTRACT 

The case we analyze is that which has come to be called the Katyn Massacre, the murder of approximately 14,500 

prominent Poles apparently by the Soviet secret police (NKVD) in the early spring of 1940.  While these men were 

actually  held  in  three  different  prisoner  of  war  camps,  the  first  mass  graves  were  uncovered  by  the  advancing 

German army in 1943 in the Katyn forest in the Ukraine and the incident is now commonly associated with this 

place. A memorial cemetery has been constructed there and it has become the site of pilgrimages and other forms of 

commemoration. Who the actual perpetrators of the massacre are continues to be a matter of dispute. While most 

accept that the killings were carried out by the NKVD, and official documents released by the Soviet government in 

the 1990s appear to confirm this, there still exist those who claim that the Nazis were the responsible party, a claim 

originally made by the Soviet government in 1943 when the bodies were uncovered.  

The  massacre  of  these  Polish  citizens  was  from  the  very  beginning  encased  in  political  conflict  and 

controversy. The individuals killed were representative figures and their murder could never be treated simply as a 

crime against individual persons.  The story of Katyn is one of silencing as much as it is of suppressed memory, thus 

one  central  issue  of  our  paper  concerns  how  traumatic  memory,  a  category  we  will  define  and  elaborate,  is 

maintained  under  conditions  of  extreme  political  domination  and  public  denial;  another  is  the  construction  of  a 

trauma  narrative  on  this  basis.  In  this  latter  process,  we  will  highlight  the  witnessing  and  representative  role  of 

intellectuals, in the broad sense to include creative individuals such as artists, writers and filmmakers.  

 

 

Introduction 

In what came to be called the Katyn Massacre, the precipitating occurrence was the mass murder 
of over 14,500 Polish elite officers and over 7,000 other Polish citizens captured by the NKVD 
in  April  1940  following  the  Soviet  invasion  of  eastern  Poland  on  September  17,  1939.  The 
directly affected collectivities were the Polish military, at that time under attack not only from 
the west by the German army but also from the east by the Soviets, and the families and friends 
of those killed. However, neither the army nor the relatives of the murdered soldiers knew the 
precise circumstances of what happened. It took years to establish historical facts and to narrate 
them  in  a  coherent  and  meaningful  way.  One  reason  why  this  took  as  long  as  it  did  was  the 

 

28

concerted attempts made by the wartime governments in the United States and Great Britain to 
silence any public discussion in the fear of alienating their Soviet ally, as well as the systematic 
attempts by the latter to cover up the facts. Any attempt on the part of Polish citizens in occupied 
Poland  to  raise  the  issue  of  possible  Soviet  guilt  was  treated  as  pro-German  treason.  As  time 
progressed,  the  affected  collectivities  expanded  from  the  military  and  relatives  and  friends  to 
include  the  Polish  nation,  as  the  event,  once  constructed,  became  an  important  symbol  in  the 
struggle  for  independence  from  Soviet  domination.  It  was  also  its  potential  anti-Soviet 
propaganda value which in large part motivated a renewed interest in the United States and Great 
Britain during the Cold War.  

According to a cultural sociological understanding of social tragedy, this particular war 
crime  could  emerge  as  a  cultural  trauma  capable of  deeply  affecting  whole  collectivities  only 
insofar as the claims to truth could be firmly established and the symbolic attribution of suffering 
and guilt effectively enacted in the form of a story couched in universalistic moral terms. The 
present project aims at exploring the social conditions under which these claims were made in 
the name of these victims as well as the cultural trajectory of the trauma narrative that followed 
the event. We will investigate how the war crime of Katyn massacre entered the core of Polish 
collective identity, when it unfolded, and what were the results of transformation of that crime 
into a major cultural crisis that to this day overshadows Polish-Russian political relations. 

While  looking  at  the  historical  facts,  we  realize  that  there  are  several  important  social 
processes at stake. First, from the very beginning the construction of the trauma narrative of the 
victims was accompanied by the construction of what we may call a counter-trauma narrative by 
the perpetrators who sought to set forth an incorrect attribution of responsibility for the crime 
and to actively conceal the circumstances of the massacre. Second, we recognize that the unequal 
distribution  of  political  and  military  power  during  World  War  II,  not  only  between  Poles, 
Germans and Russians, but also between Poles and their Western Allies,  played an important 
role  in  conditioning  the  context  of  the  whole  story.  In  fact,  we  claim  that  a  distinctive 
characteristic of traumatic narratives is an asymmetrical relation between perpetrator and victim 
and that this, in part, is what makes cultural trauma. In the present case, we deal with a situation 
that might be described as emergence of dialectic between the trauma narrative of the relatively 
weak victims based on strong premises and the counter trauma discourse of the relatively strong 
suspects based on weak premises. Third, while the power distribution mattered and continues to 

 

29

matter,  it  is  necessary  to  explore  the  conditions  under  which  the  correct  attribution  of 
responsibility  for  the  massacre  was  prevented,  the  controversy  sustained,  and  an  eventual 
resolution made possible.  

In other words, we recognize that it was not only the sheer power of political and military 
control, but also the intellectual attachments and emotional dispositions of various social groups 
on all sides that played a significant role in framing and handling the issue. These attachments, 
beliefs and perceptions, i.e. a set of time- and place-specific cultural codes and attitudes shaped 
the ways in which the incident was approached during the war and subsequently thereafter. One 
result is that these cultural codes initially obscured and suppressed the trauma drama of Katyn. 
From  the  perspective  of  cultural  sociological  theory,  this  very  fact  of  the  memory  of  painful 
experience being suppressed, not only the ruthless carnage itself, contributed to the emergence of 
collective  anxiety  and  enabled  victims  to  construct  yet  another  dimension  of  their  collective 
injury.  
 
This collective memory of terrible injury had to be first retained, however, throughout the time 
of foreign occupation (German and Soviet), passed on to others and then discussed as well as 
visualized/iconized  in  various  ways,  if  it  was  to  enter  Polish  society  and  other  societies  as  a 
major  cultural  force.  For  many  Poles  (as  well  as  the  German  and  Soviet  leaders),  the  Katyn 
massacre,  the  calculated  murder  of  a  national  elite,  symbolized  the  death  of  the  2nd  Republic 
(1918-1939) (Paul 1991: 113).  In order to analyze this process, we have decided to employ an 
analytic binary of the private and the public spheres. At least in Poland, the memory of the Katyn 
massacre has been passed on from generation to generation within the restricted channels of the 
private  sphere,  but  we  recognize  that  as  such  it  could  not  directly  constitute  a  fully-fledged 
cultural trauma that – in turn – would establish the status of the massacre as cultural crisis and 
more universal moral tragedy. 43 

This memory was repressed by the Soviet political control over Poland efficiently exerted 
between 1945 and 1989, and as a result it could not be introduced to the Polish domestic public 
                                                 
43 Is it a specific factor in the Katyn case that there were no competing ‘emblematic memories’ (Stern 2004) within 
Poland itself, as in many other cases? In narrating the memory of the Chilean military coup of 1973 and the many 
‘disappeared’ one finds several (Stern locates 4 ideal-typical emblematic memory frames) competing frames within 
the affected national population. While there may have been contemporary Poles who endorsed suppressing public 
discussion of Soviet responsibility, everyone, except for “the small minority-mostly communists-who chose to 
believe the Soviet claims’ (Cienciala et al 2007:219) appears to have accepted it was they who were responsible.  

 

30

sphere, the locus of crucial engagements with the event. However, it was possible, at least to a 
certain  extent,  among  the  Polish  diaspora  in  the  West,  especially  in  France,  England  and  the 
United States to publically address it. The publicized trauma narrative of Polish emigrants and 
exiles  was  fueled  by  their  own  private  memories  and  the  existential  anxiety  and  pain  of  the 
relatives of those killed who remained in Poland. However, as long as the Cold War status quo 
maintained the political and cultural structures that initially sought to repress the discourse of 
Katyn tragedy, the construction of cultural trauma remained latent and stalled. The potential of 
symbolic power associated with private sufferings can be fully actualized only in broad public 
sphere  and  only  when  the  directly  affected  communities  themselves  are  able  to  express  it 
verbally  and  visually  in  a  sustained  way  that  eventually  transcends  individual  tragedies  and 
projects them onto the moral screen of the whole nation and later international community.  
 
At  the  sociological  level,  we  distinguish  three  crucial  carrier  groups  (survivors,  relatives  and 
intellectuals/politicians  interested  in  exploring  the  case)  who  sustained  the  trauma  narrative 
within  the  two  dimensions  of  social  reality  we  have  specified,  some  of  them  in  both  spheres 
simultaneously.  They  had  their  own  social  organizations  and  attempted  to  use  the  public 
institutions  of  their  host  countries  as  well.  Some  of  them  delivered  extraordinary  testimonies 
replete with what one could call thick descriptions that almost single handedly established Katyn 
as  cultural  tragedy  because  it  endowed  it  with  a  tremendous  sense  of  moral  sensitivity  and 
historical authenticity, for example Jozef Czapski’s Inhuman Land, J.K. Zawodny’s Death in the 
Forest, and Salomon Slowes The Road to Katyn.   

However, it was only under the changing political and cultural conditions following the 
Autumn of Nations of 1989 and the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev in the Soviet Union that their 
trauma narrative could truly become a powerful public phenomenon, a grand trauma drama. For 
the  first  time  in  the  post-War  period  it  became possible  for  the  public  representations  of  it  to 
surface widely and for a truly international discourse to emerge. In short, the Katyn story has 
undergone a metamorphosis from a political conflict and tragedy known by few to a genocidal 
event discussed by many. Only then was the Katyn massacre completely transformed from war 
crime to collective cultural crisis.  

The most recent visualization of this traumatic event by the famous film director Andrzej 
Wajda and the whole gamut (and lack) of responses to the movie which have themselves created 

 

31

a  cultural  story  whose  complexity  refracts,  as  it  were,  the  complexity  of  the  actual  trauma 
construction.  There  are  at  once  compelling  personal,  national,  international,  moral  and 
intellectual aspects to it that can possibly illuminate the Katyn trauma. Since they are brought to 
public  life  by  a  single  event  of  artistic  production  we  can  contribute  to  the  understanding  of 
trauma construction by adding a performative analysis of it to a standard historical presentation 
of the story at hand. Such extraordinary individuals like Czapski and Wajda, both at once visual 
artists  and  intellectuals,  were  very  much  aware  of  the  fact  that  events  need  representations  if 
collective memory is to be firmly entrenched in the cultural fabric of society and to effectively 
support  a  formative  sense  of  collective  injury,  not  only  among  those  who  directly  identify 
themselves  with  those  murdered  and  their  families  because  of  national  and  civil  ties  but  also 
among  those  who  empathize  with  the  victims  because  of  more  universal  moral  ties.  Andrzej 
Wajda  emphasized  the  role  of    “showing  Katyn  to  the  world”  and  the  intensity  of  moral  and 
cultural shock of audiences in the West that ensued, for example after the screening of the movie 
at  UCLA  before  the  Oscars  ceremony  of  2008  (Wajda  2008).  Thus  we  have  to  recognize  an 
iconic  aspect  of  trauma  construction  as  well,  not  only  the  salient  discursive  regimes.  In  the 
introduction  to  “Inhuman  Land”  written  in  1984,  Jozef  Czapski  mentioned  that  the  greatest 
reward for him was that after many years there were still people who wanted to read his Katyn 
story. His mission, therefore, was proven to be complete. However, from the very beginning he 
was convinced that there’s certain kind of profound paradox involved in the whole story. In the 
book  he  notices  that  “it  would  be  impossible  to  live,  impossible  to  smile,  if  one  always 
remembered things and never erased any memories” (Czapski 2001: 96).  

Thus beyond the dialectics of victims’ trauma narrative and perpetrators’ counter trauma 
discourse  there  is  an  important  dialectics  of  memory  and  forgetting.  This  dialectics  actualizes 
itself within the temporal logic of generational change and continued cultural renewal. This was 
clearly understood by Czapski who while talking about the continued interest in his work as the 
greatest  reward  modestly  admitted  that  he  “had  not  dreamt  about  it.”  The  responses  to  the 
representations like his and his own attitude towards it should be culturally unpacked, for they 
contain the key to understanding what it really means that social actions become cultural events 
through the process of symbolic construction, not simply by themselves. This is one of the key 
things that this Katyn case study can contribute to sociological theory.        
 

 

32

A Time Line of the Occurrences 

 
In August 23, 1939, the governments of Germany and the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression 
agreement,  popularly  known  as  the  Molotov-Ribbentrop  Pact,  which  essentially  eliminated 
Poland  from  the  map  by  dividing  its  territory  between  the  two  countries.  The  document  also 
contained  a  secret  agreement  which  legitimated  the  elimination  of  its  intelligentsia.  The 
following year in the early spring, approximately 15,000 Polish citizens, (the issue of whether or 
not they were prisoners of war is a legal issue, as no formal declaration of war against the Soviet 
Union  was  made),  primarily  reserve  and  regular  officers  in  the  military,  but  also  including 
members  of  the  police  corps  were  murdered  in  the  rural  area  of  western  Russia.  44  These 
individuals  were  generally  recognized  as  the  cream  of  Polish  society.    45  The  killings  were 
carried out with German-made revolvers by the Soviet secret police (NKVD), individually with a 
single  shot  to  the  back  of  the  head  and  the  victims  buried  in  stacked  layers  of  tightly-packed 
mass graves.  46 The prisoners, mostly men but including at least one prominent female officer 
(Lt. Janina Musnicka Lewandowska, daughter of General Dowbor Musnicki), were held in three 
separate camps in the Soviet Union and killed within the space of a few weeks. Many prominent 
Polish  Jews  were  included  amongst  the  victims,  about  5%  of  the  inmates  of  one  of  the  three 
camps (Kozelsk) were Jews, according to one account, among them the chief rabbi of the Polish 
army  (Paul  1991:  70)  and  Slowes  who  survived.  There  were  also  Muslims  killed  and  the 
monument  now  but  in  the  memory  of  the  Katyn  Massacre  contains  four  different  religious 
symbols. 47 After the betrayal of the non-aggression pact agreement with German invasion of the 
Soviet Union in June 1941, the Soviets gather   captured pro-Soviet officers in the Polish military 
to form a Polish division in the Red Army. These officers present a list of those who would be 
                                                 
44 There were also about 7,000 civilians killed at other unknown locations. According to  Paul (1991:105), “for 
unknown reasons, the NKVD decided to spare 448 men from a total of 15,400…of those spared, 245 came from 
Kozelsk, 79 from Starobelsk, and 124 from Ostashkov” . 
45 According to Allen Paul (1991:65) ”the German and Soviet governments collaborated closely in their efforts to 
eliminate the Polish intelligentsia”. He and others suggest that the two governments may also have colluded in the 
Katyn massacre, making later claims and counter-claims of guilt and responsibility even more complicated. 
46 Only one eyewitness lived to describe the moment and method of execution, Stanislaw Swianiewicz now a 
professor of economics and author of In the Shadow of Katyn (W cieniu Katynia) 1976. 
47 One survivor, Father Zdzislaw Peszkowski, recounts, ”At Kozelsk, I discovered Poland”. Allen Paul, who 
interviewed Peszkowski in 1989, explains: “What he meant was that at Kozelsk he met the best that Poland could 
offer. At twenty-one he had been thrown together with men from all parts of the country, a cross-section of the 
nation’s professional elite” (Paul 1991:70-71). Peszkowski was not a priest at the time but after receiving a Phd in 
Polish literature from Oxford after the war was ordained in the United States in 1954. 

 

33

suitable to the head of the NKVD. This list contains many of those who had just months before 
been executed. The Russians tell these Polish officers that these men had been handed over to the 
Germans  (Cienciala  et  al  eds  2007:208).  Later,  in  August  1941,  the  Soviets  release  General 
Wladyslaw  Anders  from  a  prisoner  of  war  camp  and  persuade  him  to  head  a  relatively 
independent Polish army to aid in the fight against the Germans. One of Anders first official acts 
in this new role is to obtain the release of Captain Jozef Czapski, a Russian-speaking Pole and an 
internationally recognized artist, with the intention of finding out what happened to the missing 
officers. In February 1943, the Soviets organize a Russian-based Polish government-in-exile to 
counter the one already established in London, which was the one legally recognized at the time. 
This is two months before the Germans announce the discovery of the bodies in the Katyn forest, 
as the advancing German army forces the Soviets to abandon the region in late summer 1941.  

Early in the spring of 1943, a German military unit occupying a NKVD guest house in 
Katyn reports finding bodies of Polish soldiers. In part because of the severe weather conditions, 
but  also  because  of  the  historic  events  occurring  with  the  battle  of  Stalingrad  (October  1942-
February 1943) the Germans wait until late March to investigate and exhume the bodies. On 13 
April  1943  in  a  broadcast  carried  by  all  German  controlled  radio  stations,  including  those  in 
occupied Poland, Radio Berlin announces that “the local population indicated a Soviet execution 
site at Kosogory…about 3000 bodies…had already been uncovered in a huge pit…” (128) and 
that these were the bodies of “thousands of officers of the former Polish army, interned in the 
U.S.S.R. in 1939 and bestially murdered by the Bolsheviks” (Paul 1991:210). On 17 April, the 
Polish government asks the International Red Cross (IRC) to investigate. Coming as it did in the 
wake  of  the  defeat  at  Stalingrad,  the  discovery  of  the  bodies  at  Katyn,  which  the  German 
command  mistakenly  thought  represented  all  the  murdered  Polish  officers,  presented  a 
significant opportunity in the propaganda war and “Goebbels now saw an opportunity to divide 
the Allies. He wrote in his diary that as soon as he heard of this statement, he secured Hitler’s 
sanction  for  the  German  Red  Cross  to  ask  the  IRC  for  an  investigation  of  the  Katyn  graves” 
(Cienciala  et  al  2007:218).  48  This  insures  that  the  murder  at  Katyn  will  become  intimately 
couched within the wider political conflicts and intrigues of the war.  
                                                 
48 Paul (1991:207) puts it this way: ”The Germans recognized from the outset that their discovery presented a golden 
opportunity to split the Western Allies. They were keenly aware of the serious rift between the Soviets and the 
Polish government-in-exile over disputed territory in the western Ukraine and western Byelorussia. The Germans 

 

34

Following  a  German  request,  an  international  commission  worked  in  the  Katyn  forest 
carefully and systematically exhuming the bodies between 28-30 April 1943. The commission 
produced a 350 page report identifying the bodies and establishing the cause and approximate 
time of death (check on this). The Polish Red Cross, which at first refused to participate for fear 
of  supporting  German  propaganda  (and  indeed  the  Germans  thought  Polish  representation 
necessary  to  making  their  case  believable),  was  represented  at  the  site  by  a  group  of  forensic 
specialists and other technicians, including some who were active in the Polish underground. The 
advancing  Russian  army  and  the  lack  of  further  discoveries  cause  the  Germans  to  suspend 
operations and by June the Polish representatives are back in occupied Poland. 49 They strongly 
suggest Soviet guilt, but the use of German pistols and the difficulty in establishing the exact 
date  of  the  executions,  along  with  the  clear  propaganda  motivations  of  the  Germans,  raise 
doubts. In addition to the continuous radio announcements (in Kracow and other major occupied 
cities the names of the dead were solemnly and repeatedly pronounced over loud speakers in the 
central  square),  lists  of  the  names  of  the  dead  are  published  in  German  language  newspapers 
throughout occupied Poland. However, the question of who carried out the killings is publicly 
disputed,  the  Germans  accusing  the  Soviets  and  vice  versa.  Two  days  after  the  Berlin 
announcement  (April  15,  1943),  Moscow  fires  back  with  this  statement:  “In  launching  this 
monstrous  invention  the  German-Fascist  scoundrels  did  not  hesitate  at  the  most  unscrupulous 
and  base  lies,  in  their  attempts  to  cover  up  crimes  which,  as  has  now  become  evident,  were 
perpetrated  by  themselves”  (cited  by  Paul  1991:211).  Stalin  takes  the  opportunity  to  use  the 
cooperation  between  the  Polish  Red  Cross  and  German  authorities  as  a  pretext  to  break  off 
relations with the Polish government in Exile, calling them “Hitler’s Polish Collaborators”. This 
                                                                                                                                                             
knew also that more than ten thousand Polish officers captured by the Soviets in 1939 were still missing when 
General Anders and his army-in-exile left the U.S.S.R. in 1942”. 
49 The advancing Red Army also was the precipitating cause of a very dramatic attempt to preserve some of the 
incriminating documents which would help establish Soviet guilt. The documents found on the bodies of the victims 
at Katyn, such as newspaper clippings and other dated material which would have importance in establishing the 
date of the executions were hurriedly collected by the Germans and shipped to occupied Poland for safe-keeping for 
fear of falling in the hands of the NKVD which was keenly aware of both their existence and importance. These 
documents were later packed into fourteen shipping crates as the Russian army approached Krakow where they were 
kept and sent to Germany. Further advances by the Soviet army and the pursuit of the NKVD pushed the documents 
further and further Westward, until they ended up in the private home of the elderly father of Dr. Werner Beck, one 
of the forensic experts enlisted by the Germans to carry out the exhumations at Katyn. Beck had himself seen to it 
that the documents arrived there, all the while with the Soviets in hot pursuit. The crates we finally burned on at his 
request, before they could fall into Soviet hands. All this came to light during the American House hearings in 1952, 
before which Beck testified (see Paul 1991:269ff. for the full account). 

 

35

became one of the interpretative frames that would define any attempts by Poles to dispute the 
Soviet claims of German guilt.  

Late  in  1943,  the  Soviets  establish  their  own  Special  Commission  (The  Burdenko 
Commission) to investigate ‘the Circumstances of the Shooting of Polish Officer Prisoners by 
the  German-Fascist  Invaders  in  the  Katyn  Forest”  (Sanford  137).  Their  report  issued  in  1944 
supported this claim, repeating the false German figure of 11,000 bodies at Katyn. 50  A few days 
after publication, a ceremony was held at the gravesite in the Katyn forest where Polish soldiers 
of the Kosciuszko Division in the Soviet army paraded listened to a speech by their commanding 
officer,  Colonel  Berling  in  which  the  following  words  were  uttered:  “Our  inexorable  foe,  the 
German, wishes to destroy our whole nation because he desires to seize our land…. That is why 
they murdered here in Katyn Forest the Polish officers and men. The blood of our brothers which 
was spilled in this forest cries for revenge” (reported by an eyewitness at the House Hearings and 
cited by Paul 1991:260). Katyn and the cry for vengeance became a strong motivating agent in 
both forces of the Polish military fighting in the war, those led by Berling and those more closely 
linked to the West, originally led by Anders.51 The Soviets would name a tank the Avenger with 
this in mind. It was also a strong motivating force in the Polish resistance and in what was called 
the Home Army, the force behind the tragic Warsaw Uprising in 1944 where Polish forces were 
hopeless  outnumbered  by  the  Germans  and  where  the  Red  Army,  camped  on  the  outskirts  of 
Warsaw, watched passively. The Soviets viewed the Home Army with the same lens as it viewed 
the London government-in exile, as Polish nationalists who were a threat to Soviet aims in the 
                                                 
50 The Russian report gained support from two significant Americans present when the Soviet report was made 
public. They were John Melby of the American embassy in Moscow and Kathleen Harriman, the daughter of 
Averell Hariman, the American ambassador. In her report, Harriman wrote “…it is my opinion that the Poles were 
murdered by the Germans. The most convincing evidence to uphold this was the methodical manner in which the 
job (the murders, R.E.)was done, something the Commission thought not sufficiently important to stress”. Melby 
wrote: “It is apparent that the evidence in the Russian case is incomplete in several aspects, that it is badly put 
together, and that the show was put on for the benefit of the correspondents without opportunity for independent 
investigation or verification. On balance, however, and despite the loopholes, the Russian case is convincing” (both 
cited in Paul 1991:259). This is the message that Ambassador Harriman then sent to the U.S. State Department.  
Both Melby and Kathleen Harriman would later reverse their opinion when testifying before the House Select 
Committee in 1952. 
 The issue of the ‘methodical manner’ of the killings is an important one in that for both sides, it symbolized the 
ruthless inhumanity of the other. For those third parties, the manner of killing also was important in confirming 
already established images. For example, for many who supported the Allies, such as the two individuals above, the 
Germans were easily associated with such evil and the Russians less so. The Poles however had long experience of 
the ruthlessness on both sides in this struggle and could as easily see this act carried out by either. 
51 Just weeks before Normandy, the Polish Second Corps, led by Anders, were decisive in the battle of Monte 
Cassino on the road to Rome and the defeat of the German army on the Italian front. Other Polish troops were 
among those who landed on the Normandy beachhead in June 1944.  

 

36

region and they did all they could to discredit and destroy both. Polish hopes and their sense of 
betrayal by both the Soviets and the British in this event are powerfully represented in Wajda’s 
well-known trilogy.   
 
At the Nuremberg tribunals in 1946 the prosecution of the perpetrators of the Katyn massacre 
fell  under  Soviet  jurisdiction  as  it  occurred  in  their  allotted  zone.    The  indictment  read:  “In 
September 1941 11, 000 Polish officers, prisoners of war, were killed in the Katyn woods near 
Smolensk”. While it did not name the Germans as perpetrators, it was clear from the dating of 
the event who was to blame, as the region was at that point under German occupation. The case 
presented was based on the findings of the earlier Soviet report (Paul 1991:335). The German 
lawyers put up a strong defense and there was much suspicion of Soviet guilt, but in the end the 
Soviets formally withdrew their claims the case was omitted from the final verdicts announced in 
late September, 1946. Besides the general ambiguity amongst the Allies, another reason given 
was that the Tribunal was concerned only with German war crimes. GB and the US are reluctant 
to  confront  their  Soviet  allies  on  this  matter  and  seek  to  bury  it  as  an  issue,  the  Polish 
government-in  exile  had  expected  this  and  sought  to  have  the  issue  of  Katyn  excluded  from 
consideration at Nuremburg.  
 
With the continued Soviet presence, any discussion of Katyn was strictly forbidden in post-war 
Poland. One incident, recounted by one of the families of Katyn victims followed by Allen Paul, 
will suffice. “Shortly after the war, Magda Czarnek, then a medical student at the Jagiellonian 
University,  met  on  a  crowded  Krakow  streetcar  an  acquaintance  she  had  not  seen  for  several 
years. After exchanging a few pleasantries, the woman asked, “And how is your father?” Didn’t 
you know?” Magda replied. “We lost him at Katyn.” These words brought a shaken look to the 
woman’s face as she glanced quickly at the passengers nearby, worried that some of them might 
have heard Magda’s answer. Turning back to Magda she whispered, “Don’t you know?” That is 
not something to say in public!” (quoted in Paul 1991:334). With much of their recent history 
deemed forbidden as topics of public discussion, Poles were directed to the official account of 
the war given in the Great Soviet Encyclopedia. As something publicly forbidden, reference of 
Katyn was kept within the bounds of the private sphere, while in the public memory it became a 
symbol for Soviet oppression. If public discussion was forbidden in Poland, this was not the case 

 

37

for the émigré Polish communities in the West. In the Cold war and under pressure from Polish-
Americans,  most  notably  the  Polish  American  Congress    (PAC,  established  in  1944,  Sanford 
141) leads to the creation of a congressional committee called the American Committee for the 
Investigation of the Katyn Massacre, the Lane Committee. In 1951 the House establishes a Select 
Committee to investigate ‘the facts, evidence and circumstances of the Katyn forest massacre” 
(142). Some of the witnesses called wear hoods while testifying to avoid identification for fear of 
their families living in Poland.  Hearings held throughout 1952, in the highly politicized time of 
the Korean War and McCarthyism. In its final report, December 1952 named the Soviets as the 
responsible agent and recommended a case be made at the UN and the International Court of 
Justice against the Soviet Union and called for the establishment of an International Commission 
to investigate crimes against humanity. The USSR was denounced for ‘one of the most barbarous 
crimes against humanity’ (144). In 1965 a US postage stamp is issued commemorating the event 
and  implying  Soviet  guilt,  this  was  pushed  through  by  Congressman  Edward  Derwinski  of 
Illinois, Chicago having the largest concentration of Polish Americans. There is a campaign to 
establish a Katyn monument in Great Britain, which is strongly supported by the American based 
Polonia,  an  association  of  Polish  Americans.  In  1972  the  Daily  Telegraph  prints  a  headline 
“Russian guilt for Katyn Reaffirmed” (Sanford 180). Books appear in GB and a BBC tv program 
1971.  A  memorial  is  built  in  London  in  1976  (185),  yet  it  does  not  mention  the  perpetrators.  
Rise of dissident organizations and the emergence of Solidarity bring Katyn forcefully into the 
Polish  public  sphere.    Intellectuals  involved  in  KOR,  the  Worker’s  Defense  Committee 
established in 1976 makes Katyn a central issue, calls for an April Anniversary commemoration 
and for “Polish citizens and émigrés to commemorate the anniversary of Katyn not in a spirit of 
revenge,  but  in  a  spirit  of  truth  and  fraternity  among  all  people  of  good  will  of  all  nations” 
(Lipinski 351), so as not to confront the USSR in a direct way. Although CPSU chairman Nikita 
Khrushchev apparently ordered the files destroyed, the folder containing the original execution 
orders  remained  in  the  Soviet  archives.  In  1988,  Polish  PM  Jaruzelski  and  Russian  leader 
Gorbachev agree to the construction of a Katyn Memorial. In July 1988 at a meeting with Polish 
intellectuals, Gorbachev promises “he would accept the truth”.  

On  April  13,  1990  the  50th  Anniversary  of  the  Massacre,  Gorbachev  reveals  Soviet 
responsibility for Katyn. However, it is not until later that June that the KGB makes public the 
burial place of the thousands of others killed at the other two camps. It is clear now that in Katyn 

 

38

itself 4421 officers were killed, and that 6311 of those kept in the camp in Ostaszkow and 3820 
of those kept in the camp in Starobielsk were liquidated in Mednoe and Kharkov respectively. To 
this  day  there  is  no  precise  information  concerning  the  tragic  lot  of  remaining  7000  other 
prisoners.52    In  1992,  key  documents  were  given  to  former  Solidarity  leader  and  current  PM 
Walesa. 2007 Wajda’s film is released. 2008 several Russian newspapers continue to blame the 
Germans  for  the  Katyn  massacre,  something  which  might  have  to  do  with  the  case  brought 
before Russian courts by Polish Katyn families seeking economic compensation for their loss. 
Their claims were denied there. For Poles Katyn remains an open wound.  
 

The Maintenance of Memory 

 
There are three prime sources in the maintenance of the memory of Katyn, the Polish military, 
the families and friends of the victims and the émigré Polish communities scattered around the 
globe. The Polish military was the first to bear collective responsibility for the loss of its men 
and along with the government-in-exile and the underground resistance the first organization to 
search  for  them.  This  was  carried  out  under  traumatic  circumstances:  the  Polish  army  was 
decimated by having to fight a war on two fronts. While they valiantly resisted the German and 
Soviet enemy, they were ill-prepared and suffered devastating losses while trying desperately to 
hold out in anticipation of engagement from their British and French allies. The Poles had formal 
agreement with both countries, that in case of German invasion they would come to Poland’s aid. 
Needless to say this did not happen. While their relations with Moscow were never friendly since 
they  defeated  the  Soviet  Army  in  1920,  an  occurrence  which  led  to  the  seizure  of  territory, 
border disputes and to hostile relations with their Eastern neighbor.  53 Still the Soviet invasion 
came as a shock, especially as it was justified by Moscow as merely a protective measure after 
the German invasion to aid Ukrainian and Lithuanian minorities on Polish soil. The members of 
                                                 
52 It is surmised by historians that at least some of them may be buried in Bykownia, near Kiev (contemporary 
Ukraine), and in Kuropaty near Minsk (contemporary Belarus). 
53 The Soviet army was defeated in August, 1920 after pushing westward to spread the Bolshevik revolution and 
extend Soviet control over the region. The Communist forces were quite successful and were stopped only near 
Warsaw at the Vistula River and then pushed out of the newly reconstituted country. The Soviet army was only able 
to escape as it did with German help. The territory seized was ethnically mixed, but predominantly Polish, 
Lithuanian, Ukrainian and Belarusian, with  numerous Polish Jews as well. Prior to the 1920 war, the Polish army 
pushed eastward and briefly controlled Kiev. The entire period between 1918-21 was an extremely complicated one 
with regards to the newly formed Poland and its neighbors.  

 

39

the Polish army seized by the Soviets on the Eastern front were fooled into thinking they were 
merely being re-deployed by their Soviet allies. Many of the officers among them died at Katyn. 
The confusing circumstances contributed to the devastating affect on the Polish Army of the loss 
of so many of its officers.  

The families of the victims at first reacted to the disappearance of a member individually. 
This would develop into a collective force as the search led by the authorities in the military and 
government progressed. Later, especially during the closing days of the Soviet occupation more 
formal organizations of Katyn families would form with in Poland. These organizations began 
much earlier amongst Polish émigrés, especially in the United States and Great Britain.  
 

Knowledge, Remembrance and Meanings of Katyn Massacre in Poland, 1943 – 

2008 

“To not have your suffering recognized is an almost unbearable form of violence” 
 
Andrei Nikolaevich Lankov, a Russian orientalist 

 

“In the vacuum of complete dehumanization the bottom point is the point where meaning is 
attached to the sign anew and the silence overcomes itself” 
 
Tomas Venclova, a Lithuanian writer 

 
The  sixty-five  years  of  the  Katyn  trauma  drama  in  Poland  have  constituted  a  narrative  of 
protracted civil struggle for historical transparency and moral repair. Specifically, it has been a 
struggle  for  public  acknowledgment  of  actual,  Soviet  responsibility  for  the  extermination  of 
Poland’s elite citizens, for unveiling the missing links of history, and for symbolic closure of the 
issue as a cultural tragedy. 

In order to state briefly the difference between the post-war situation of Polish Diaspora 
in Western Europe and the United States and in-country citizens,  one could say that whereas the 
story of Katyn Massacre was an inconvenient truth in public discourse in the West, it remained a 
rather cumbersome official lie and eventually a top-secret issue in the public sphere of Eastern 
Europe until 1989. As a matter of fact, it continues to be a political taboo in the official discourse 

 

40

of contemporary Russia, a circumstance that sheds additional light to the conditions of Soviet 
occupation in the region and its cultural legacy.  

The time between the first public information about the existence of mass graves in the 
Katyn Forest in April 1943 and the first official celebration of the Katyn Remembrance Day on 
April 13th, 2008 was a period during which this specific issue  became a key signifier of Polish 
victimhood  as  inflicted  by  communist  Russia.  Much  of  this  time  was  consumed  by  civil 
perseverance and moral dedication to an issue that was silenced and consigned to oblivion by the 
highest echelons of authority. To many the issue seemed almost lost, to others it remained vague 
or virtually unknown.   

For those Poles who knew the facts as established in 1943, and remembered  thereafter, 
this was a dramatic period not only because of the traumatizing potential of the  knowledge they 
initially had to face and keep,  but also due to the fact that before 1989, (1) this knowledge and 
remembrance have been strictly suppressed for decades, (2) the directly involved carriers of this 
knowledge systematically persecuted, threatened or socially marginalized, (3) a false account of 
events was disseminated from the outset of People’s Republic of Poland, and (4) the issue was 
ignored altogether from the 1960s on by official media.  

Beyond  this  there  was  an  even  greater  number  of  individuals  for  whom  the  drama 
consisted in an anguish of uncertainty intertwined with the premonition that the Katyn massacre 
was not an isolated case. As time elapsed, the worst case scenario was finally  confirmed. But 
before  that  confirmation  could  arrive  in  Poland,  the  Katyn  drama  symbolized  in  an  ever 
increasing number of Polish circles the vast array of physical and psychological damage inflicted 
on  the  Polish  people.  It  signified  at  once  the  extermination  of  Polish  prisoners  of  war  in  the 
Soviet  Union,  the  long  lasting  uncertainty  and  confusion  concerning  the  facts,  the  brutally 
enforced silence, the gaping lack of information about “loss in the east,” and last but not least the 
communist hypocrisy, obfuscation and deception with regard to this issue. 

The specificity of the Katyn trauma consists then not simply in the systematic nature of 
the atrocities committed by the Soviet state apparatus and of the groups targeted, but also in the 
fact that the mass killings were cynically appropriated and used by two totalitarian regimes for 
their own political purposes, initially effectively silenced by democratic states, and that what was 
uncovered in 1943 had been shut down or falsely represented to a Polish society under Soviet 
domination.  

 

41

          Knowledge  of  the  massacre  had  been  scattered,  incomplete  and  overshadowed  by  the 
perpetrators counter-narrative and their symbolic frames. Since memory is indispensable for the 
experience  of  trauma  and  since  memory  does  not  exist  without  its  cognitive  object,  i.e.,  the 
actual knowledge of the incidents, the conditions of the Katyn cultural trauma construction might 
seem  very  unfavorable.  Indeed,  the  Soviet  political  realism  of  the  time  determined  an 
overwhelming corruption of reality, a paradigmatically Orwellian situation in which the control  
of  the  present  strictly  depended  on    control  of  the  past.  The  latter  meant  the  destruction  and 
falsification of hard evidence, the psychological and physical torture of inconvenient witnesses, 
and above all the blurring of key social meanings and degrading the value of individual life. In 
this process,  language itself was permeated by sayings such as an ambiguous Russian phrase “to 
lie like an eye-wittness” (Nim 2008: 22). This Orwellian reality filled with newspeak was also a 
Kafkian  reality  that  created  a  social  “labyrinth”  as  another  Russian  dissident  emphasized 
(Abarinow 2007: 9, 13).  

All  this  ensured  the  typical  totalitarian  condition  of  perennial  fear,  disorientation, 
suppression  of  knowledge  and  lack  of  critical  public  debate.  However,  these  particular 
circumstances  appear  to  have  added  to  the  sense  of  trauma  felt  in  thousands  of  Polish 
households. Crucially, the Katyn tragedy was emerging not just as a trauma of tragic memory but 
as a trauma of scant, robbed and persecuted memory. It was not only about what was coded as 
extraordinary injury but also about a necessity of dealing with silence, uncertainty and falsehood 
in ordinary daily life.  

Actual memory of the occurrence as such was relatively scarce for the simple reason that 
only approximately 394 out of more than 20,000 captured left the detention camps alive, spared 
by  NKVD  and  initially  grouped  in  a  separate  camp.  Because,  as  one  of  the  survivors  Jozef 
Czapski  noted  (2001:  71),  the  prisoners  had  not  even  considered  the  possibility  of  mass 
extermination; the very few who survived and could be regarded witnesses did not quite realize 
then what exactly was going on in fall of 1939 and spring of 1940. For many Polish citizens the 
first  weeks  of  terror  and  havoc  caused  by  the  Soviet  occupation  of  Poland  meant  a  brutal 
confrontation with the informational chaos and political arbitrariness of invading power. For this 
reason it seems more adequate to talk here about tedious processes of ascertaining and verifying 
knowledge, about channels and frameworks of communicating and disseminating it, and finally 
about acts of commemoration, artistic representation and responses to them.  

 

42

This is also a reason why cultural trauma scholars tend to employ such notions as ‘post-
memory’  (Hirsch).  Working  in  a  similar  vein,  the  German  scholars  Aleida  and  Jan  Assmann 
(reference) introduced the distinction between communicative and cultural memory. From this 
vantage point a key sociological question becomes how exactly is  witness-based remembering 
conveyed  and  translated  to  the  collective  level  and  subsequently  transformed  into  sustained 
social  remembrance?  The  way  we  approach  it  here  is  influenced  by  an  understanding  of  the 
micro-macro  link  in  sociological  explanation  (Alexander  1987).  We  recognize  that  just  as 
individuals need the horizon of cultural meanings to make sense of their experiences, so society 
needs  individual  testimonies  and  specific  narratives  laden  with  personal  emotions,  some  of 
which  can  incrementally  be  turned  into  symbols,  typifications  and  archetypes  which  then  are 
formative in any given society’s collective identity.  

How  exactly  are  these  narratives  turned  into  symbols  and  collective  meanings?  The 
present study emphasizes in this respect the role of discursive frames and visual representations 
predicated  upon  a  specific  set  of  cultural  binaries  that  in  turn  are  intertwined  with  emotional 
attachments.  First  of  all,  there  is  the  dichotomy  of  truth  and  lie  employed  in  all  narratives 
surrounding the case. This fundamental binary is often accompanied by other oppositions such as 
the innocence and guilt, decency and perfidy, openness and secrecy. Secondly, in addition to the 
fundamental division of the public and the private we can speak of the dichotomy of the official 
and the underground, the state and the society. These binaries are not, of course, identical, but it 
is  important  to  recognize  that  under  the  Communist  regime  they  often  overlapped  to  a 
considerable  extent.  The  transmission  of  private  narratives  into  public  discourse  was  severely 
restricted, and in case of Katyn mostly downright impossible, in the last years of World War II 
and  immediately  after  the  War  until  so-called  ‘political  thaw’  of  1956.  It  continued  to  be 
seriously  hampered  by  the  state  apparatus  and  its  ideological  orthodoxy  almost  until  the  very 
collapse of Communism in 1989. However, private discourses and the familial transmission of 
memory could never be completely muffled, and they eventually carved out a significant social 
niche  whose  meanings  and  cultural  relevance  began  to  be  felt  in  public,  at  least  to  a  certain 
degree. Interestingly, as we shall demonstrate later, this particular tension between state order 
and  social  order  can  easily  be  re-inscribed  within  the  mythical  tragedy  of  Sophocles’  play 
“Antigone”.  

 

43

On top of this, we deal with yet another binary, namely that between what can and cannot 
be spoken, a dichotomy of what can (and should) be told and discussed, and what seemed to 
constitute the unspeakable. On the one hand, there is speech and text as forms of anthropological 
imperative to express oneself and testify. As Lithuanian writer and Professor of Slavic Literature 
at  Yale  University  Tomas  Venclova  writes  in  his  book  titled  Forms  of  Hope,  “speaking  and 
writing means overcoming and transcending” (1999: 129). Certainly, speaking and writing about 
the  forbidden  truth  of  Katyn,  whether  in  private  or  in  public,  was  a  form  of  overcoming  and 
transcending  the  Communist  regime  that  suppressed  it  in  Poland.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
construction of each cultural trauma involves a specific distribution of the sacred and profane, 
and an understanding of the symbolic borders of its representation and reception. According to 
Izabella Sariusz-Skapska who devoted her Ph.D. dissertation to the Polish literary memory of the 
Gulag  experience,  “to  not  cross  the  border  between  testimony  and  silence  of  things  that  are 
ineffable  is  a  condition  of  reliability  of  representation”  (Sariusz-Skapska  2002:  22).  The 
ineffable is understood as something that cannot be fully communicated, not only because of the 
limitations of language employed by story-tellers, but also because of impossibility of finding a 
full  entrance  into  communicated  narrative  on  the  part  of  recipients.  Moreover,  there  are  also 
borders  to  what  should  be  communicated,  in  that  the  risks  associated  with  crossing  the 
aforementioned borders can mean either the banalization of victims’ suffering or the fascination 
with the profane and evil. Therefore while researching forms of knowledge, remembrance and 
post-memory one faces a double problem of, (1) the politically molded possibility and (2) the 
culturally molded ability to speak out and hear in a particular social context. 

If we take into account the first criterion of the politically shaped possibility of public 
expression,  we  can  distinguish  at  least  three  general  periods  within  the  temporal  brackets 
established here during which the processes of trauma construction occurred. The knowledge of 
Katyn Massacre was being obtained and transmitted, remembrance enacted, and the event itself 
intellectually  and  artistically  represented  under  various  social  conditions  in  the  following, 
heuristically delimited political eras: (1) 1943 – 1956, (2) 1956 – 1989, (3) 1989 – 2008. If we 
refer to the second criterion of culturally shaped ability to communicate a specific periodization 
is much harder to establish. It is affected by political conditions but is also responsive to various 
other circumstances that have their own, often non-linear logic of temporal change. However, 
one can distinguish one such particular circumstance that has crucially affected the emergence 

 

44

and maintenance of cultural trauma of Katyn in Poland and its broader significance. It is the lack 
of  symbolic  closure  in  trauma  drama  and  determined  pursuit  of  making  it  happen  despite  all 
adversities.  

There  is  direct  psychological  evidence  that  possessing  a  life  story  in  the  form  of  a 
biographical narrative is a crucial part of the mental well-being of an individual, at least as far as 
Western culture is concerned (Tilmann, Habermas 2008). A meaningful and coherent narrative 
of  this  sort  is  one  of  the  key  conditions  of  making  sense  of  one’s  life  and  thus  creating  and 
maintaining  a  relatively  consistent  self-identity,  i.e.,  a  sense  of  selfsameness  and  continuity, 
without which functioning in modern society is hardly possible. This complex narrativization of 
the life-course connects facts and endows them with meaning by reference to other meanings, 
emerges and develops significantly only in adolescence (Habermas 2008: 719). The key terms 
‘consistency’ and ‘coherence’ should not be mistaken for ‘stability’, but what they do imply is 
that the ruptures, shocks and breaks that have occurred are meaningfully incorporated into and 
symbolically represented through personal narration. In practice this often means that particular 
events are narratively “closed as chapters.”  

The developmental logic of cultural trauma appears to resemble this pattern, providing 
once  more  an  interpretive  link  between  the  macro  and  micro  characteristics  of  human  life. 
Meaningful events are rarely, if at all, constructed as such immediately upon their arrival in an 
individual’s biography, and one makes full sense of them with time and often rediscovers them 
in  the  process  of  ongoing  biographical  interpretation.  Tragic  occurrences  themselves  usually 
come  as  shock,  often  accompanied  by  initial  disbelief  and/or  confusion.  It  takes  time  to  fully 
comprehend    and  represent  them  meaningfully,  i.e.  in  relation  to  broader  symbolic  structures, 
with reference to other occurrences and in dialogue with those who are not directly affected but 
nevertheless  remain  potentially  connected  to  them  through  emotional,  ethical  and  symbolic 
means of social life.  

A recurrent string of metaphors that is intuitively crucial in this respect is that of injury, 
wound  and  scar.  A  full-fledged  cultural  trauma  emerges  as  a  full  recognition,  symbolic 
elaboration and meaningful representation of social wounds that remains open. It continues to 
exist as a cultural process that tends, as it were, to turn wound into scar, something healed but 
still present. The symbolic closure is indispensable at this point. Lack thereof keeps the wound 

 

45

open and fosters anxiety derived from deprivation of coherence in a narrative marked by tragic 
occurrence.  

               *** 
Robert  Nozick  concluded  an  essay  on  Holocaust  by  stating,  “perhaps  every  evil  of 
whatever magnitude constitutes some distortion of human space. It has taken a cataclysm to get 
us to notice” (2006: 242).One role of a cultural sociologist is to show that “noticing” is more 
complex  a  process  than  meets  the  eye  and  that  beyond  it  lie  even  more  complicated  social 
processes of representation that render “human cataclysms” cultural traumas. The following is 
meant to show how the mass killings of Katyn first affected the community of victims in their 
own country, how and why that community was denied a symbolic closure of the tragedy, and 
the specificity of the closure that was eventually  realized. 
 
The anonymous mass graves containing thousands of murdered Polish citizens were never meant 
to be found. The sites of the Soviet genocidal actions were dissembled by newly planted trees 
and well hidden, for example at NKVD spa centers like in the case of Katyn (Oseka 2007: 5).54 
There  were  systematic  attempts  at  purposefully  destroying  these  “death  pits,”  such  was,  for 
example, the case of the massacre site near Kharkov in today’s eastern Ukraine (Materski 2008: 
132).  The  local  population  was  often  arrested,  just  in  case,  and  then  some  were  deported  and 
subsequently replaced by people from other distant locations of the Soviet Union.55 Deportation 
to  the  far  eastern  parts  of  Soviet  Union  awaited  also  many  of  the  family  members  of  those 
killed.56 The  NKVD sought  to destroy any and all material traces of the massacre. For example, 
in June 1940 in the Starobielsk camp 3655 unsent letters of the imprisoned Polish citizens were 
burned  (Adamska  2007:  12).  Prior  to  the  actual  massacres  a  wave  of  letters  had  reached  the 
                                                 
54 The presence of young trees on the site of the massacre became actually yet another among numerous detailed 
evidence against Soviets. The international forensic commission employed a forester named von Herff who 
established that the pine trees growing there were 5 years old and planted 3 years prior to the arrival of the 
commission (Kwiatkowska-Viatteau 1988: 26).    
55 Jozef Czapski mentions in his book ”Inhuman Land” that even the inhabitants of places like Buzuluk where the 
Anders’ Army had stationed before it left Soviet Union were later deported by NKVD to distant parts of the country 
(2001: 104). 
56 It was a part of much larger deportation action organized by the Soviet invaders during their occupation of eastern 
Poland. According to the Ribbentrop-Molotow pact between Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia signed in August 
1939 the eastern voivodeships of Poland were left at the discretion of the latter. Until the Nazi breach of that 
agreement in June 1941 NKVD had probably managed to deport over one million people from those territories, i.e. 
around 8% of their total population. It is estimated that over 50% of them were Poles, nearly 30% Jews, and around 
18% Ukrainians and Belarussian (Gross 2008: 7).   

 

46

families in Poland, but these ceased abruptly in March 1940, a fact which later constituted yet 
another symbolic indication of when the massacres occurred, and hence who was to be blamed. 
Some of the letters to and from families, diaries, family pictures and other personal belongings 
retrieved in 1943 at the Katyn site, reached relatives in Poland. The sheer abundance of such 
things  in  the  mass  graves  strongly  suggested  that  the  victims  were  kept  unaware  of  their 
impending fate until the last moment.57 For families in the country who managed to get access, 
these  objects  meant  being  “connected”  to  their  lost  relatives.  Those  who  despite  the  fear  of 
communist persecution did not destroy the recovered diaries and other personal items tellingly 
discontinued in 1940 or the last letters sent to them that year, all such things constituted a scarce 
body of sacred relics and priceless traces. Such documents are currently preserved in private and 
national archives as carriers of crucial material connection to the past that for half a century was 
consigned to dematerialization.  

Just as the Soviet aggression against Poland in September 1939 came as a shock to Poles, 
so  was  the  German  aggression  against  Soviet  Union  received  in  June  1941.  It  was  a  highly 
unexpected breach of the non-aggression pact that Soviet government signed two years earlier 
with Nazi Germany. The eventual seizure of the western parts of Soviet Union by German troops 
meant also the sudden loss of control over the sites of massacres and ipso facto the critical loss of 
monopoly of the detailed knowledge about them. The Soviet Union and later also the communist 
government of Poland were therefore put in a highly precarious position that required an intense 
propaganda  actions  designed  to  cover  up  correct  attribution  of  responsibility.  As  Andrzej 
Wajda’s film emphasizes, a sovereign post war Poland was impossible without the elite that had 
been systematically decimated both by Nazi Germany and Soviet Union during WWII.58 By the 
same  token,  a  failure  to  cover  up  the  Soviet  act  of  liquidation  of  the  Polish  elite  would  have 
made an unobstructed inauguration of a communist Poland hardly possible in the years following 
the  war.  As  a  result,  the  knowledge  and  remembrance  of  Katyn  massacre  became  coded  as 
extremely dangerous to the externally enforced and thus potentially vulnerable Communist status 
quo  in  Poland.  Remembering  the  truth  about  Katyn  was  understood  as  an  utmost  threat  to 
                                                 
57 A striking fact discovered by the exhumation specialists in 1943 was that the bodies were buried in the order that 
matched precisely the system of transportation of the prisoners from the camps to the execution sites. It was 
established thanks to the pertinent record kept by the officers in their private diaries and later found next to them in 
the death pits (Kwiatkowska-Viatteau 1988: 26). 

 

47

Communism’s political credibility and the Soviet Union’s proclaimed moral status as Poland’s 
liberator in WWII. Hence it became an object of strict suppression, and mass symbolic violence 
systematically followed the mass physical violence that occurred in 1940. The symbolic violence 
of  Communist  propaganda  at  the  time  of  installing  new  Soviet-dependent  Polish  communist 
regime  was  interpreted  by  those  directly  affected  as  adding  an  unbearable  insult  to  already 
existing injury. After all, the new Communist authorities “protested too much.” For some this 
meant the high moral obligation to persist and make sure that the knowledge was passed on and 
thus less dissipated throughout society. Others, however, were effectively silenced or chose to 
silence  themselves  because  of  the  risks  involved  in  the  early  post  war  and  only  began  to 
communicate  their  trauma  many  years  later,  if  at  all.  The  memory  of  the  mass  murder  of  the 
Polish elite was at first, relatively, an elite social fact.     

In this context,  it comes as no surprise that the specific carrier groups with first hand 
knowledge and those who harbored the most emotionally charged memory of the massacre, such 
as the families of the murdered,  were either chased after or closely watched by the NKVD and 
its collaborators in Poland. Polish forensic specialists and other experts from Poland who visited 
Katyn in 1943 were defined as one of the most significant among these carrier groups. Among 
them were: Ferdynand Goetel, Jan Skiwski, Dr. Edmund Seyfried, Konrad Orzechowski and Dr 
Edward Grodzki. Goetel was one of the people who prepared written accounts of what the group 
found as the results of the work of international specialists on the site, all of whom arrived at 
similar conclusions, namely, placing blame on the Soviets. In 1945, Goetel and Skiwski were 
officially  considered  criminals  in  communist-controlled  Poland  but  they  managed  to  flee  the 
country  illegally.  Others  were  arrested  and  interrogated  in    NKVD  prisons  in  Poland. 
Orzechowski  was  subsequently  deported  to  east  Russia.  The  fate  of  Dr  Grodzki  remains 
unknown to this day.  

Another person of similarly crucial importance was Kazimierz Skarzynski. He organized 
the on-site proceedings of the Polish Red Cross in the Katyn Forest between April and June in 
1943  and  contributed  significantly  to  the  creation  of  the  lists  of  the  murdered,  i.e.,  the  Katyn 
records independent of the German ones. As one of very few Poles who actually saw the mass 
graves and examined them, Skarzynski prepared a report that was promptly delivered to London. 
                                                                                                                                                             
58 At the time when Soviets imprisoned Polish officers and intellectuals in the east, Germans conducted their own 
actions against Polish non-military intelligentsia. For example, Sonderaktion Krakau and AB actions whereby 

 

48

The documents and material evidence were sent to Krakow’s Institute of Forensic Research. He 
continued his work in Poland aimed at uncovering full truth in subsequent years. Skarzynski’s 
knowledge,  however,  quickly  became  dangerous  to  himself  and  his  family.  Threatened  by  an 
imminent NKVD capture, he spent last years of war under changed surname in the countryside. 
He  managed  to  leave  Poland  illegally  with  his  family  in  May  1946.  Skarzynski’s  report  was 
evaluated as very valuable by the British Foreign Office, yet this certainly contributed to treating 
it as a top-secret item (Przewoznik 2007: 15). The findings included there were later published, 
but only in 1955 and in a Polish journal “Kultura” edited in Paris by Jerzy Giedroyc, the venue 
that until the end of communism in Poland remained one of the key sources of “underground” 
knowledge and memory for Polish society. 

Finally, there was an interview with Jozef Mackiewicz published on June 3, 1943 after he 
had visited Katyn as an observer in spring that year. Mackiewicz was a known literary figure in 
pre-war  Poland  and  during  the  war  a  journalist  in  Goniec  Codzienny  (“Daily  Messenger”),  a 
Polish  newspaper  that  was  being  issued  in  Vilnus  controlled  after  1941  by  Germans.  The 
interview titled “I saw it with my own eyes” reported quite extensively on the Katyn massacre. 
Mackiewicz stated that he had “absolutely no doubts that the massacre had been conducted by 
Bolsheviks” (1988: 55). He referred to the works of the international commission and provided 
information about the established facts, witnesses and specialists involved in the issue. But what 
is most significant from a cultural sociological point of view in that testimony is the language in 
which Mackiewicz couched his recollections. Asked if he remains “under impression” of what he 
had seen he replied: 

„I  don’t  know  if  one  can  call  it  being  ‘impressed.’  Impression  is  a  result  of  some,  usually 
singular event or fact, limited in itself. Smolensk which I saw, Katyn, crimes, corpses, ruins, 
bolshevism  that  I  went  through  myself,  and  the  letters,  letters  of  children  to  their  fathers, 
beginning with the words: ”Dear Dad” or ”Dear Daddy,” being dug out now from the piles of 
squashed, putrid bodies, from this swamp of death or the semi dried Polish uniforms... Yes, all 
of this creates a sort of long chain of associations, thoughts, reflections sinking deep in the heart. 
I would not call it an impression. An experience rather” (1988: 51).  

 

This,  one  of  the  first  statements  from  the  interview,  was  aimed  at  establishing  Mackiewicz’s 
authority  as  a  witness  and  introduces  a  significant  distinction  between  ‘impression’  and 
                                                                                                                                                             
thousands of academic and other professionals were imprisoned and liquidated between 1939 and 1941. 

 

49

‘experience’  that  can  be  mapped  in  the  more  general  cultural  understanding  of  the  difference 
between the shock of a violent occurrence and the cultural trauma of violence later inflicted. It 
refers  to  the  building  of  an  experience  through  associations  and  connecting  its  facts  to  the 
horizon  of  culture  and  affect.  Moreover,  Mackiewicz  stated  that  “the  Katyn  tragedy  is  not 
anymore a tragedy of particular persons or their families but of the whole nation” (1988: 54). 
While  developing  this  thought,  he  emphasized  that  “he  was  deeply  convinced  that  the  widest 
possible groups of the Polish nation as well as all other nations should understand a deeper sense 
and danger of Bolshevism” (1988: 54). This can be interpreted as one of the first public acts of 
trying to connect the tragedy of Katyn to more universal moral codes and thus to represent the 
massacre as a cultural trauma. Because of the factual and symbolic weight of the interview, as 
well  as  a  string  of  anti-Soviet  publications  authored  by  him  in  1944  in  Warsaw  and  Krakow, 
Mackiewicz  was  sentenced  to  death  by  Polish  Communists.59  He  escaped  Poland  in  January 
1945 and continued to publish on the Katyn massacre first in Rome, then in the Parisian Kultura 
and  later  in  London  where  he  authored  the  first  work  in  English  about  it.  His  testimonies 
constituted one the key sources of knowledge about Katyn.   

It  became  clear  that  those  few  eye-witnesses  had  to  either  flee  the  country  or  be 
imprisoned shortly after WWII. They managed to pass on their knowledge to specialists and lay 
people in the country and through their work aided a more general framing of the massacre. But 
it was the personal trauma of the families, especially of the wives, mothers and children of those 
killed  that  supplied  the  critical  mass  of  highly  emotionally  charged  tragic  narratives  (see  for 
example those collected in Kaczorowska (2003 in Polish and 2006 in English). Their situation 
became particularly dramatic as any inquiries concerning the fate of “the lost in the east” and the 
public  sharing  of  knowledge  and  opinion  about  Katyn  began  to  be  strictly  prohibited  and 
persecuted. Yet thousands of women waiting in vain for their husbands, brothers and sons were 
one of the key elements of society that imperceptibly were undermining the official discourses. 
Their forced silence in the first decade following the war compounded the traumatizing sense of 
helplessness and initially confined their suffering to strictly private sphere. The dissemination of 
“false information about Katyn crime” was punished by the Communist government of Poland 
                                                 
59 Earlier during the war, he had gained a controversial reputation as a journalist in German-controlled Vilnus, was 
accused of collaboration with Nazi Germany by Polish Home Army, and subsequently sentenced to death by it. 
However, he was not executed and later absolved due to lack of hard evidence and a growing suspicion that the 
whole issue came about as a result of provocation of Soviet intelligence that was infiltrating Home Army.   

 

50

with the two-year sentence in labor camp. Acts of invigilation targeting the families took place 
and those caught spreading “the false knowledge” could even be accused of espionage (Oseka 
2007: 7). If one was identified as a child of those “lost in the east” the entrance to education and 
other  institutions  could  have  been  seriously  hampered  if  not  impossible.  Once  drafted  to  the 
Polish army, the sons of those murdered could have been actually directed to work in mines and 
other industrial locations controlled by Communists (Skapski 2009 – my interview). 

Under such strenuous political and social conditions the wives, sisters and mothers of the 
exterminated officers were important carriers of remembrance of the victims not only due to the 
knowledge some possessed but most importantly because of their emotional attachment to the 
case.  The  atmosphere  of  fear  and  the  strict  official  control  of  the  Katyn  narrative  fostered 
suspicion towards the government and its official propaganda. As members of elite families, the 
women came to feel responsible for saving the traces of what was for them a true Polish heritage, 
the  vestiges  of  their  life-world  that  now  was  to  be  systematically  erased.  That  feeling  was 
buttressed by the fact that many of them belonged to the first generation raised and educated in 
independent  Poland  created  in  1918  after  123  years  of  political  non-existence  caused  by 
partitions (Ksiazek-Czerminska 1999: 7). For some the imposition of Communist regime could 
have appeared as a continuation of previous Russian domination under a different banner. The 
disappearance of their husbands in the Soviet occupied Poland was linked to it and the binary of 
truth and lie was mapped onto the division of society and state; though not quite underground 
heroes, the wives, sisters and mothers of the murdered launched one of the key mechanisms of 
transmission  of  remembrance  into  the  public  sphere.  In  the  first  period  this  was  completely 
“privatized”  and  restricted  to  the  occasional  distribution  of  leaflets  and  individual  acts  of 
sabotaging official propaganda. As their official and personal abandonment persisted, their fate 
eventually became emblematic.     
In  short,  the  first  period  of  the  emergence  of  Katyn  as  trauma  drama  was  marked  by 
 
shock,  confusion  and  extreme  forms  of  symbolic  struggle  surrounding  the  massacre  and  its 
circumstances.  The  key  narratives  were  created  and  the  clash  of  victims’  discourse,  related 
counter-discourses and acts of covering the story up shaped the reception of the crime. Still, in 
the  1940s  in  Poland  the  name  of  Katyn  was  being  mentioned  openly  along  Auschwitz  as  a 
symbol  of  German  genocidal  actions  (Oseka  2007:  7).  The  official  discourse  blaming  the 
Germans  subsided  in  the  wake  of  Stalin’s  death  in  1953  but  continued  to  be  one  of  the  key 

 

51

elements  of  legitimation  of  Poland’s  communist  government.  It  was  only  in  1956  when  the 
political  climate  was  changed  unequivocally  by  the  unfavorable  light  shed  on  Soviet 
Communism. Many of Stalin’s crimes were revealed by the Soviet government itself. Although 
this  provided  a  powerful  context  for  an  unambiguous  evaluation  of  the  Katyn  massacre, 
Communist  propaganda  in  Poland  did  not  cease  to  employ  the  standard  Soviet  version  for  its 
own purposes of political and cultural control. Until the end of the 1950s the name of “Katyn” 
had its own entry in encyclopedias, defining it as a geographical location in Russia and falsely 
identifying  it  as  the  site  of  massacre  of  Polish  citizens  committed  by  Germans  after  they  had 
seized that territory in 1941 (e.g. Suchodolski 1959: 407).  

The next 25 years saw the official silence on the issue on the part of Poland Communist 
authorities. The great encyclopedia published by Polish Scientific Publishers (PWN) in 1965 has 
no mention of Katyn (1965, Vol. V). This situation has not changed in subsequent decades. It is 
hard to judge today what the exact motivation was behind the change of strategy in approaching 
the tragedy of Katyn. Yet for a sociologist not the shift itself or its political intricacies are of the 
greatest  significance  but  rather  the  cultural  consequences.  In  the  eyes  of  the  vast  majority  of 
those who remembered the massacres symbolized by Katyn or found out about it in the wake of 
the  thaw  of  1956,  this  act  of  introducing  a  total  censorship  on  the  Katyn  issue  had  one 
fundamental meaning among others, namely that it could be viewed as an indirect, and probably 
unwitting, acknowledgment of the Soviet responsibility (Oseka 2007: 7).  

From  that  moment  on,  a  series  of  persistent  iconic  and  discursive  actions  were  taking 
place.  The  official  silence  was  countered  by  repeated  unauthorized  civil  undertakings.  The 
symbolic opening of this period of publicly enacted resistance was marked by the inception of so 
called  “Katyn  Valley”  on  the  main  cemetery  of  Warsaw.  On  All  Saints’  Day  in  1959.  A 
commemoration site for the Katyn victims was created there, a place where a cross and plaque 
were put by unidentified people. It was openly named “the symbolic grave of the Polish officers 
murdered  in  Katyn”.  Perpetrators  were  not  explicitly  named,  but  the  plaque  stated  that  the 
officers “perished on foreign soil at hands of a cruel enemy” and that “they deserve memory and 
honor.”  The traditional candles were laid there in acts of spontaneous response. The site was 
liquidated  after  only  one  day  by  state  militia  officials,  who  noted  that  they  had  managed  to 
“reintroduce  order  to  the  cemetery”  (Sawicki  2007:  18).  Though  “state  order”  was  promptly 
reintroduced, the public manifestation revealed the existence of a “societal underground order”, 

 

52

which destabilized it symbolically. It was a brief but visible cry for recognition which triggered a 
sense  of  moral  empowerment,  first  in  Warsaw  but  later  also  in  other  cities  whose  inhabitants 
connected to the murdered kept visiting the “Katyn Valley” in the following years. This cry for 
recognition was a signifier of a secretly lived trauma that expressed a deep sense of suppressed 
“we”  and  the  responses  of  authorities  made  it  clear  they  cared  about  the  incident.  The 
Communist government indeed treated the situation seriously, initiating an official investigation 
and launching a secret police operation that consisted in systematic intelligence efforts to find 
out who stood behind the cemetery event. The results, however, were poor and what might be 
called resistance performances continued to be enacted there until the collapse of Communism in 
1989. These occurred not only on the 1st of November but also on other days like April the 13th 
and September the 17th. The apogee of this string of iconic actions was reached in the heyday of 
Solidarity struggle in 1981 when a real 4-meter high monument weighing 8 tons was put on the 
focal spot of the “Katyn Valley.” Like all previous material symbols of resistance erected in that 
place, it was promptly removed by the authorities, but became much discussed in many private 
circles  in  Warsaw  and  other  places  and  interpreted  as  yet  another  demonstration  of  civil 
disobedience and political disbelief. In effect, the actual fame of the “Katyn Valley” has been 
discursively  and  iconically  cemented,  at  least  in  the  capital  city  and  those  connected  to  it 
(Sawicki 2007: 19). In the end, the story of the cemetery performances only indicated that the 
dedication with which the Communist authorities sought to erase the remembrance of Katyn was 
directly proportional to the actual cultural potential of this memory as a general signifier of the 
Soviet-related Polish sufferings and, ultimately, to the extent of the moral debacle of Communist 
regime in Poland.    

A quarter of a century after the “Katyn Valley” was created as a symbolic space of anti-
communist  contestation,  there  appeared  in  Poland  the  first  school  textbook  that  described  the 
Katyn massacre vaguely enough to create precedence in the official discourse about it. The civil 
success of Solidarity was preceded by the election of  a Pole, Karol Wojtyla, as the Pope John 
Paul II in 1978, effecting a wave of unauthorized discourse about Katyn. No one seemed to be 
afraid  of  talking  about  Soviet  responsibility  in  the  Solidarity  inspired  time  of  unprecedented 
“festival of freedom” (Materski 2008: 122). Underground materials were circulated around the 
country  and  meetings  organized  by  the  church  played  an  important  role  in  the  life  of  city 
intelligentsia,  the  group  most  directly  attached  to  the  story  of  Katyn  crime.  By  then  the  Iron 

 

53

Curtain was already rusty and porous enough to let information from the outside in and create a 
“strange situation” in which the official censorship itself began to be unsure about what exactly 
was allowed to be published (Abarinow 2007: 11). As a result, there was a plethora of illegal 
publications  created  inside  or  smuggled  into  the  country  from  Western  Europe  and  the 
probability  of  encountering  information  about  Katyn  increased  dramatically.  The  grand 
international  myth  of  Solidarity  was  emerging,  even  if  the  movement  itself  was  temporarily 
muffled by the Martial Law introduced by the Communist government in 1981.  

Though still relatively arcane, the truth about Katyn became an undeniable fact of life 
among  many  representatives  of  the  Polish  intelligentsia,  a  commonly  recognizable  cachet  of 
increasingly  self-confident  societal  “us”  against 
the  discredited  governmental  “them.” 
Incrementally growing social pressure effected further alteration of the ruling party’s stance and 
in closing years of the 1980s the Katyn massacre was sporadically thematized in official media 
and  political  institutions  like  the  Parliament.  It  was  also  the  time  when  the  first  large-scale 
sociological  research  on  Polish  collective  memory  was  conducted.  Two  things  about  these 
studies  strike  the  reader:  (1)  23%  declared  that  they  talked  about  history  “often”  and  54%  - 
“sometimes;” (2) nearly 3% declared that they talked with others about such things as Katyn or 
the Ribbentrop-Molotow Pact, and more than 5% discussed the Stalinist period in Poland or the 
Martial Law (Szacka 2007: 3). The overall cultural impact of Solidarity and anticipatory climate 
of  1980s  became  obvious  but  the  research  showed  the  scale  of  damage  caused  to  the  Polish 
collective  memory  by  Communist  propaganda.  A  clear  discrepancy  between  a  heightened 
general historical interest and specific discursive commitments indicated the cultural legacy of 
four decades of autocratic regime. Even if, as a later study showed, 40% found out about Katyn 
during  the  Communist  period,  that  awareness  seemed  to  be  one  among  many  other  tragic 
memories and as a key trauma still apparently confined only to those directly connected to its 
occurrence.  The  excitement  and  then  euphoria  associated  with  leaving  Communism  behind 
appeared  to  be  the  euphoria  of  the  exhausted  as  far  as  collective  identity  was  concerned. 
However, in view of those who cultivated still circumscribed but now stronger commitment to 
the issue, the end of the 1980s meant a renewed hope. The demand for proper recognition of 
Katyn, however slim, seemed hardly quenchable.   

In the newly forged climate of broader political change in Eastern Europe a series of new 
discourses  about  Katyn  made  an  ineradicable  impact  on  Polish  intelligentsia.  So  it  came  as  a 

 

54

profound  disappointment  and  ultimate  disillusionment  when  on  July  14,  1988  Mikhail 
Gorbatchev announced at the official meeting with the representatives of Polish intellectuals at 
Warsaw’s Royal Castle that “there exists no secret documentation which would shed a new light 
on  the  Katyn  crime”  (Materski  2008:  124).  For  the  truly  radical  change  in  the  official 
presentation of events Polish citizens had to wait until the revolution of 1989, and specifically till 
April 13, 1990 when the official news agency of Russia (TASS) finally acknowledged, even if 
under somewhat inadvertent circumstances, the Soviet responsibility for the massacres in Katyn 
and the existence of further extermination sites of Mednoe and Kharkov.60 It took place exactly 
half a century after the moment when the world first heard the terrible news of Katyn.  

As  Andrzej  Wajda  admits  himself,  this  was  the  time  when  his  cinematographic 
intervention into the Katyn trauma drama should have taken place (Wajda 2007: 5). Changes in 
Moscow at the outset of the 1990s seemed to create sufficient symbolic space for a relatively 
open, long-term dialogue with by then a completely politically altered Warsaw. They promised a 
potential for eventual exposure of relevant Soviet archives and reconciliation. An ensuing full 
disclosure of knowledge and responsibility would mean a clear symbolic closure of the trauma. 
This  potential,  however,  was  hardly  ever  fulfilled  in  a  manner  suggested  by  the  collapse  of 
Communism in Eastern Europe. In Polish society itself, however, a qualitatively unprecedented 
era of the Katyn trauma drama began.  

The  Round  Table  Talks  in  spring  1989  gave  Poland  the  first  democratic  elections  in 
Eastern Europe and 1990 was the year when Lech Walesa became the President of Poland and 
the Polish Communist Party was officially dissolved. The opening of last decade of the twentieth 
century meant the point of no return in terms of the developing  Katyn trauma drama. Even if 
painful, new concrete prospects of unfettered inquiry and commemorative catharsis were opened. 
Still, it took another decade to realize a partial symbolic closure of the trauma and then nearly 
another  10  years  to  launch  the  official  full-fledged  process  of  ritualization  inside  the  country. 
Despite what might be interpreted as a significant delay of the official commemoration of Katyn, 
the crime did emerge as a key signifier of WWII tragedy and Polish trauma of Soviet occupation. 
This metamorphosis of formerly subterranean and private tragedy of Polish soldiers into a central 
                                                 
60 As a matter of fact, Soviet government led by Gorbatchev had appeared to be forced to admit its guilt officially 
after a few Russian historians, such as Natalia Lebedeva, obtained a rather unwittingly issued permission to examine 
NKVD archives that indirectly proved Soviet responsibility (Materski 2008: 125 – 126). The text of the TASS 

 

55

traumatic narrative of country’s history is remarkable. The finally liberated country caused many 
tragic but previously stifled Polish memories to surface. As Michael Kimmelman wrote in The 
New York Times, “Poles have especially good reason to see themselves as long oppressed, having 
been fought over and occupied for much of the last century by vicious regimes” (2009: 6). How 
then has it been possible that this particular crime and its ordeal became a distinguished trauma 
narrative?  

After  1989  the  most  apparent  change  was  a  sudden  public  visibility  of  Katyn.  Books, 
articles,  documentaries,  discussions,  and  monuments  of  various  kinds  filled  media  and  public 
sphere in general. The classic accounts of the crime and its circumstances finally found their way 
to bookstores and libraries. Among them were tellingly titled diaries such as “Inhuman land” by 
Jozef Czapski or “Without last chapter” by Wladyslaw Anders, and novels such as “The silent, 
the invincible” by Wlodzimierz Odojewski or “Katyn. Post mortem” by Andrzej Mularczyk. The 
latter became the narrative base for Andrzej Wajda’s film. But perhaps the most significant was 
the  emergence  of  a  new  civil  movement,  The  Katyn  Families  Association,  with  affiliation 
abroad, as well as in Poland itself. The few relatives of the victims  who remained alive could 
finally speak up and express their anguish. It was this non-governmental and explicitly apolitical 
organization that created a symbolic forum for them, and established itself as a key carrier of 
remembrance  and  an  indelible  sign  of  unhealed  Polish  war  wound.  It  has  become  a  logical 
cultural continuation of half a century long persecuted memory. 

Interestingly  enough,  the  absolute  priority  of  the  Association’s  public  mission  was  to 
establish  official  symbolic  cemeteries  at  the  three  massacre  sites  revealed  by  Gorbatchev. 
Finding out where exactly the other sites are that continue to hide over seven thousand of the 
murdered  was  also  defined  as  crucial.  The  first  goal,  understood  as  the  unprecedented  real 
symbolic act of the dignified commemoration of the victims and of “emphasizing of the drama,” 
has been realized. The second still remains a task for the future. For this reason, the symbolic 
closure was felt as partial. However, the official opening of the Katyn cemetery on July 28, 2000 
functioned as a key event for the trauma drama and played an invaluable role as catharsis, not 
only for the families but also for Polish society as a whole. This was the case because over the 
                                                                                                                                                             
announcement itself was cautious but powerful enough and launched an avalanche of irreversible changes to the 
issue. 

 

56

years  Katyn  has  become  the  effective  synonym  of  the  Soviet  massacres  committed  on  Polish 
citizens during World War II (Skapski 2009 – my interview).61   

 The Association refers to various cultural binaries to frame the specificity of the Katyn 
trauma drama and to present its pursuits to the public. The crucial ones are dichotomies between  
civilized and barbarian actions and dignified and degrading conduct. Reference is also made to 
legal  obligations  that  were  breached  by  the  Soviet  perpetrators  and  the  ethics  of  full 
acknowledgement,  transparency,  repentance  and  compensation.  As  its  leaders  unanimously 
recognize the “shamefulness of Russian position” connected to “the crime unknown in civilized 
world,” they are acutely aware that what they have achieved in terms of symbolically closing the 
Katyn trauma deepens its actual potential as such also for Russian society. As a matter of fact, 
the  actual  place,    Katyn,  happens  to  be  an  old  NKVD  execution  site  where  thousands  of 
anonymous Russian citizens were also buried. The solemn and well-organized commemoration 
of Poles murdered there raises broader questions about internal Soviet crimes and inspires the 
remembrance of those thousands of Russian citizens who also fell victim to the regime.  

As  a  full-fledged  cultural  trauma  Katyn  potentially  assumes  another  meaning,  namely 
that of a key condition of Polish-Russian political relations and thus of being a part of common 
European identity as well; more specifically, Europe’s attitude towards history of Communism. 
While in 2008,  52% of Poles believed that contemporary Russia must openly settle its historical 
issues, especially the Katyn Massacre, in order to count on Poland’s partnership, 69% of them 
declared that it is necessary to “forgive Russians” (Koscinski, Serwetnyk 2008). This narrative is 
embraced also by the leaders of the Katyn Families Association (Skapski 2009 – my interview). 
However, the establishing of Polish symbolic cemeteries in Katyn, Kharkov and Mednoe, as well 
as ongoing efforts to uncover further extermination sites meet understanding and strong support 
in  relatively  small  circles  and  only  in  such  Russian  organizations  like  “Memorial.”  The 
contemporary  Russian  responses  still  have  among  them  publications  such  as  Jurij  Muchin’s 
“Anti-Russian Meanness” that continue to maintain untenable Soviet-like explanations. The very 
possibility  of  such  public  discourse  undermines  the  prospects  of  political  reconciliation  from 
Polish  point  of  view.  Moreover,  recent  legal  efforts  for  compensation  made  by  some  of  the 
Katyn families encountered rejection at every level of the Russian court system. This form of 
recognition  has  been  clearly  denied  to  the  victims.  What  seems  to  emerge  out  of  this 
                                                 
61 Two other official cemeteries were openned in the same year in Kharkov in Ukraine and Mednoe in Russia. 

 

57

international circumstance is the realization not only the harm done to Katyn families and to the 
legacy of Soviet Communism but also that certain meanings of “Russianness” are at stake. This 
obviously emotionally and culturally compounds the already existing problems.         

Finally,  the  Association  recognizes  also  that  any  closure  in  the  form  of  official 
commemoration  may  mean  the  potential  of  the  actual  ossification  of  memory  and  hence  its 
partial trivialization (Sariusz-Skapska 2002: 11). Paradoxically, the acts of symbolic closure may 
make  the  tragic  story  dull,  as  historically  catalogued  and  resolved.  The  symbolic  closure  is 
necessary,  for  it  crucially  alleviates  the  private  anguish  of  those  directly  involved  and  raises 
public awareness of country’s actual history, but at the same time it may distance those whose 
expectations towards such things are shaped not by abstract attachments but concrete emotions. 
As  temporal  distantiation  slowly  adds  its  own  dimension,  potentially  turning  traumatic  events 
into mere historical facts, these may become disconnected from the moral and affective fabric of 
society  that  originally  gave  birth  to  them.  Public  disinterest  becomes  probable  when  there 
emerge  attempts  at  political  instrumentalization.  This  nearly  happened  to  Katyn  in  the  time 
shortly before the establishment of Katyn commemoration day in Poland. The members of the 
Association and other public figures involved remain concerned with the danger of a right wing 
instrumentalization of this event and have opposed it explicitly (Szumer 2007: 3). As the Polish 
Parliament finally and unanimously declared the 13th of April the National Remembrance Day of 
Katyn  Victims  in  2007  and  first  official  commemoration  followed  in  2008,  the  Katyn  trauma 
drama  was  at  once  re-launched  and  closed.  On  the  one  hand,  that  is  what  contributes  to  the 
emergence  and  maintenance  of  cultural  trauma  in  the  first  place.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
recognition,  especially  among  the  Association  leaders,  that  in  order  for  even  the  most  tragic 
events to become and be maintained as cultural trauma, they need self-reflective representation 
and specific narratives that connect to more global human aspects of life. And finally, there is a 
more general understanding in Polish society that even such deeply tragic events need to be at 
least partially left behind in a sense conferred to this recognition by Czapski.     

Since  the  official  registration  of  the  Katyn  Families  Association  in  1992  around  four 
thousand individuals have joined it. They have had opportunities to openly tell and share their 
private stories, and project them into the public discourse. Association members contributed to 
the emergence of  clear public articulation of the Katyn trauma as a special cultural event. Beside 
their struggle for official commemoration, they engaged in the projects of publishing personal 

 

58

stories of silenced and abandoned women that were previously thwarted. This effort stems from 
the conviction that in absence of authentic documents, only literature and private diaries can fill 
lacuna  of  recognition,  acknowledgment  and  empathy.62  Those  killed  have  been 
the 
unambiguously represented as a patriotic elite, their history disclosed in details and their tragic 
fate narrated in a way that connects the tragedy not only to an injured Polish identity, but also to 
a more general human sensibility.  

It  has  been  shown  that  the  murdered  were  the  prisoners  of  war  without  war  being 
declared,  their  death  sentence  saw  no  trial,  their  death  was  accompanied  by  no  funeral,  their 
names were consigned to anonymity, the crime of which they were victims was left, and still 
remains, without punishment, and the damage of execution was followed by lie and indifference 
instead  of  recognition  and  compensation.  Because  the  victims  were  carefully  chosen  by  the 
perpetrators  according  to  specific  military  and  civil  criteria,  and  because  they  were  denied  all 
that  constitutes  human  symbolic  conduct  in  boundary  situations,  their  families  became  the 
Antigones of national fate. Through the publication of memoirs and diaries, the murdered Polish 
elite were finally publicly and unequivocally represented in their own country as normal family 
members who became inadvertent martyrs. They were rescued from anonymity by connecting 
them clearly to their daily life-world. At the same time they appear as martyrs because their main 
“guilt” was their specific citizenship combined with particular social origin and occupation and 
who therefore were viewed by the victimized and the perpetrators alike as one of the key carriers 
of  Poland’s  cultural  continuity  and  professional  values,  regardless  of  specific  religious 
background. 

All these symbolic components and anthropological imperatives of trauma drama have 
been recently artistically condensed in Andrzej Wajda’s movie titled simply “Katyn”, to date the 
most internationally visible statement about the incident. The film, short listed for an Oscar for 
the best international movie in 2007, explicitly thematizes an “Antigonic” element of the story. It 
realistically  depicts  the  incident  itself  and  links  it  to  the  contemporaneous  crimes  of  Nazi 
Germany  committed  on  Polish  society,  but  focuses  primarily  on  what  the  massacre  meant  to 
families, particularly to wives and sisters of the victims. In the opening text of the first set of 
memoirs  written  mostly  by  wives  and  daughters  of  the  victims  and  published  by  the  Katyn 
                                                 
62 To this day the Russian government has not delivered to the Polish side 21857 personal NKVD folders of the 
killed. It claims that they had been destroyed. However, there is no confirmation that they were indeed burnt 

 

59

Families Association under the title “Written with Love,” one of the first sentences refers to the 
“terrible silence” that shrouded longing and despair (Bakowska 2000: 9). Wajda, whose father 
was among those murdered in Kharkov, visualized this aspect and reveals through it the brutal 
and cold-blooded destruction of a particular life-world. By shifting the attention from soldiers 
themselves to those who loved them and whose loss was publicly unrecognized, Wadja made the 
extension of sentiments and identification possible.  

The movie was noticed internationally and was received as a shocking story, from Berlin 
to  Los  Angeles.  However,  the  difficulties  with  global  distribution  caused  largely  by  the 
indolence of Polish National TV, responsible for the movie as a commercial product, contributed 
to “murdering of the film” (Wajda 2009: 16). In addition, the reluctance of certain audiences to 
be  confronted  with  it,63  and  what  some  viewed  as  a  problem  of  an  occasionally  “too  arcane” 
contextualization  of  the  movie  (Applebaum)  has  significantly  decreased  its  anticipated 
international  impact.  The  director  was  apparently    aware  of  the  predicament  created  by 
“Katyn”’s obscure historical references, something which may make parts of the film politically 
illegible (Wajda 2009: 16), but as a part of the legacy of great silence concerning various aspects 
of Soviet history this very predicament renders the movie a kind of invitation to unpack East 
European mysteries. This problem has been reversed with Polish audiences. The Katyn trauma 
drama appeared so symbolically and politically charged in that country that the movie has been 
susceptible  to  political  manipulation,  not  unlike  the  official  remembrance  of  the  massacre 
described above. Referring to this danger, Wajda has stated that he is more afraid of the allies of 
the movie than its enemies (Wajda 2007: 5).  

But regardless of the specific problems of immediate reception, the widespread visibility 
of a movie by the country’s most noble director, honored in 2000 with an Oscar for his whole 
oeuvre, created a significant intervention that may serve as a pattern to follow and made lack of 
knowledge of the crime much more shameful than before. Certainly in Poland itself few could 
fail to notice it upon its release in fall of 2007. Already before the screening of the movie 95% of 
Poles had declared that they knew the name “Katyn,” yet as much as 40% had not known who 
                                                                                                                                                             
(Materski 2008: 131). 
63 ”Katyn” has so far been largely ignored as an ”inconvenient” picture for example in Italy, the fact linked to the 
influence of Italian leftist circles (GW 23 April 2009). However, even one of the biggest cinema networks in the 
country that belongs to the family of Silvio Berlusconi launched only a DVD distribution of the movie. Whereas this 
may have come as an unexpected disappointment for some observers, it has not been surprising that the Russian 
distribution of the movie is almost non-existent.   

 

60

exactly is to be blamed for the massacre and 10% had still believed that the perpetrators were 
Germans (GW 23 April 2007).64  

The movie released to the market in 190 copies half a year later, on September 21, 2007, 
was watched in the cinemas across the country by 1,021,881 persons only during the first two 
weeks, 265,000 of which viewed it in the first weekend of its screening.65 By the 20th of October 
2007 the number had already reached two million66. By the end of 2008 the number of viewers 
reached  2,7  million.67  Such  an  attendance  could  not  fail  to  change  the  sociological  figures 
mentioned before. Above all, as an artistic intervention it represented and recalled  Katyn as a 
grand symbol of the individual’s helplessness vis-à-vis the totalitarian state and re-inscribed this 
recollection within a personally and concretely grounded narrative. Due to this connection the 
film has vividly depicted a group experience that thanks to this portrayal made decisive strides 
towards confirming itself as a truly collective experience of Poland as a cultural community. It 
was  one  of  the  more  important  representations  that  attached  anew  the  meaning  of  human 
suffering to the sign of Katyn and aided the victims’ silence overcoming itself. 

  
 

Some Notes Toward a General Conclusion 

 
Lack  of  symbolic  closure  deepens  cultural  traumas.  It  is  conceived  of  as  necessary  for 
controlling the trauma and sufficient for launching of the processes of reconciliation.  
We can distinguish specific parts of it: 

1.  overcoming anonymity 
2.  overcoming silence by the victimized 

                                                 
64 There is here, of course, a methodological problem at stake, namely how can researchers be sure that the statement 
„Yes, I have heard about Katyn” is not distorted by a more general framework that stigmatizes ignorance. It would 
perhaps be better to possesses in this respect studies that elicit pertinent knowledge or lack thereof indirectly. Still, 
even if the figure of 95% regarding those who declared they knew of Katyn were exaggerated, it is not unrealistic to 
assume that the vast majority of society indeed have heard about it by 2007 and thus could identified and respond to 
the issue. 
 
65 http://www.wprost.pl/ar/115088/Katyn-obejrzalo-milion-widzow/ (May 12, 2009) 
 
66 http://film.wp.pl/id,81557,wiadomosc.html?ticaid=1803e (May 12, 2009) 
 
67 http://www.money.pl/gospodarka/wiadomosci/artykul/rekord;frekwencji;-
;32;mln;polakow;odwiedzilo;kina,20,0,311828.html (May 12, 2009) 

 

61

3.  acknowledging the guilt openly by the perpetrators 
4.  establishing ritualized commemoration 
5.  establishing  the  reconciliation  dialogue  between  representatives  of  the  victimized  and 

representatives of community to which the perpetrators belonged  

 
As we have seen, the case of cultural trauma of Katyn starts with the fundamental problem of 
sheer knowledge of facts, something usually taken for granted in trauma discourses. The very 
awareness of occurrences was for a long time partial and what was known was either suppressed 
or framed in a way that made the story controversial. The specificity of the case forces us to ask 
new  general  questions  about  the  relation  between  such  categories  as  knowledge,  awareness, 
memory, commemoration, remembrance, media. The sociological definitions of these terms are 
often taken for granted and their epistemological status hardly explored. One of the values of this 
study is that it may contribute to a better understanding of what we really mean when we employ 
these concepts in sociological practice. 
 
Beyond power/knowledge category there seems to exist a complex notion of memory/knowledge 
(perhaps this should also include ‘memorialization’). Both definitional elements of the latter are 
mutually  constitutive  and  fundamental.  Yet,  they  are  also  largely  passive  phenomena. 
Memorizing  something  constitutes  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  condition  of  using  it,  i.e. 
making  it  consequential  for  one’s  biography  and  the  environment.  There  is,  of  course,  no 
memory without knowledge; memory needs its objects (thus memorialization as sites of memory 
as well as commemoration and the practices which go along with that). At the same time, we 
cannot  really  know  anything  if  we  do  not  have  memory.  In  actual  practice,  these  categories 
largely overlap.  

Therefore the issue of cultural trauma is less a matter of sheer memory and more a matter 
of what structures memory and how, and then what and how “activates” it so that it may become 
a  social  fact  with  Durkheimian  ramifications.  Memory/knowledge  compound  requires  to  be 
symbolically  unpacked  through  social  performances  and  artistically  elaborated  in  order  to  be 
turned  into  active  remembrance.  Memory/knowledge  appears  often  as  something  essentially 
“dormant.”  To  be  become  “active”  and  thus  culturally  consequential,  it  requires  emotional 
                                                                                                                                                             
 

 

62

commitments  of  various  groups,  ritualization  of  its  core  messages  and  recurrent  presence  in 
different  media.  Above  all  it,  needs  to  be  experienced  affectively  and  represented  artistically 
within  channels  of  broadly  conceived  popular  culture  if  it  is  to  matter  for  modern  collective 
sense of belonging and continuity.   
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

63

 

 
 

Claiming Trauma through Social Performance:  

The Case of Waiting for Godot 

 

Elizabeth Butler Breese 

In November 2007, Samuel Beckett’s play Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two 

Acts was performed in two neighborhoods in New Orleans: Gentilly and the Lower Ninth Ward.  

In Gentilly, a house destroyed by Hurricane Katrina served as the set; in the Lower Ninth Ward, 

the play was performed at an intersection of formerly busy streets.  On face value, the production 

of a classic French Surrealist play on the streets of two neighborhoods largely destroyed by 

Hurricane Katrina is curious.  Why did producers stage, actors perform, or audiences attend this 

play in such unlikely locations?  What did the play mean to the audience and actors in New 

Orleans?  Further, what meanings did the production convey to audiences other than the one 

physically present at the performances?   

Beckett’s Waiting for Godot debuted as experimental, avant-garde drama.  Today, it is 

widely acclaimed as one of the premier dramatic works of the twentieth century.  Throughout the 

play’s arc from experimental to canonical drama, critics, academics and journalists have 

recognized that Waiting for Godot has a “special relevance” and resonance when it is staged in 

contexts of political oppression, violence, and disaster (Bradby 2001: 162).  Instead of the 

numerous explanations for resonance in these contexts, I offer one: productions of Waiting for 

Godot have achieved “re-fusion” in contexts of trauma.  I closely examine Waiting for Godot—

the circumstances of its creation, its aesthetics and available meanings—in order to analyze 

productions of the play and its unique resonance in contexts of trauma (Eyerman and 

McCormick 2006). 

 

64

Concentrating on Susan Sontag’s production of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo in 1993 

and Paul Chan’s production in New Orleans in 2007, I argue that the productions in these 

locations are social performances as well as theatrical performances which express, 

communicate, and narrate trauma.  The play, written after and out of Beckett’s experience of 

war, expresses the mood of collective trauma.  However, even in contexts of collective trauma, 

the metaphor of waiting does not speak for itself.  Directors, producers, actors, journalists, and 

critics insert references to the meanings of the trauma into the play.  The central proposal of 

cultural trauma theory is that trauma does not simply happen but must be created through 

meaning work of construction and narration.  Social actors make claims about their trauma—the 

nature of suffering, who are victims, and who the perpetrators—through these productions of 

Waiting for Godot.  The productions communicate the claims to trauma to the audience that is 

physically present at the performances as well as to a wider audience who read and hear 

journalists’ accounts of them.  As social performance, rather than political speech, the claims 

which are made about the trauma are not posed as claims to truth in a Habermasian sense but as 

claims to expressive aptness (Rauer 2006: 259).  This case study of productions of Waiting for 

Godot illuminates that carrier groups and social actors make different kinds of claims in the 

trauma process: some claims to trauma appeal to factual truth while others appeal to expressive 

aptness.  Quite simply, this study illustrates that there are different ways to construct and narrate 

trauma.  We must understand the different types of claims to trauma and their different measures 

of success in order to evaluate how and why trauma processes begin or fail, continue or stall.      

 
Personal, Historic, and Artistic Context of Waiting for Godot 
“War is latent in much of Beckett’s work” (Gontarski cited in Bradby 2001: 13).       
 

 

65

Samuel Beckett wrote Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two Acts in a flourish of 

literary productivity in 1948/9.  Beckett spent most of the 1930s traveling and living in Britain, 

Ireland, Germany, and France. By the time World War II reached France he was living in Paris 

where he established himself within Surrealist and avant-garde literary and artistic circles and 

started writing in French.  Distraught by the German occupation of France, Beckett and many of 

his friends joined The Resistance (Bair 1978: 309&319).  After participating in The Resistance 

for a year, his network was betrayed to the Nazis, and Beckett and his partner Suzanne 

Deschevaux-Dumesnil went underground for their safety (Bradby 2001: 12).  In October 1942, 

after two months of hiding in Paris, Beckett and Suzanne procured false papers to move to the 

unoccupied zone.  The couple proceeded by foot from Paris to Roussillon in Provence, where 

they stayed for two and a half years (Bair 1978: 318&319).   

The unique aesthetics of the Provence countryside and Beckett’s experiences in 

Roussillon figure significantly, though rather subtly, in Waiting for Godot.  In Roussillon, war 

was omnipresent; it was the reason Beckett was compelled to stay in the Provencal village, and it 

shaped nearly all the conditions of life.  Beckett and his neighbors and friends in Roussillon 

listened to radio reports of the war, and he participated in late-night resistance missions (Bair 

1978).  Several literary scholars argue that Beckett’s post-war writings reflect his real, rather 

than purely intellectual, experience of war and “all the anguish of waiting for contacts in 

dangerous circumstances, of seeing friends betrayed, hearing of their torture and death…” 

(Bradby 2001: 13).  Beckett habitually took long walks while biding his time in Roussillon (Bair 

1978: 325).  The opening stage directions of Beckett’s play announce the setting: “A country 

road.  A tree.  Evening” (Beckett [1954] 1982: 1).  Beckett’s travelers wait, uncertain of their 

fate, along a road like the ones between Paris to Roussillon or like the country roads where 

 

66

Beckett passed the time waiting for the war to end.  In addition, Beckett made several direct 

references to Roussillon in Godot, including the unique red color of the dirt, and he named a 

character, “Bonnelly,” after a local farmer (Bradby 2001: 12&13).  As I will discuss later, Godot 

does not explicitly refer to war.  However, the fear, anxiety, uncertainty and waiting the play 

conveys are unmistakably born of his experiences during the war in Roussillon.  Before I 

examine productions of Godot which make claims to trauma, let us look closely at Beckett’s play 

in order to understand the literary script employed in the social performance of trauma.                                     

 
Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two Acts 
 

Simply stated, Waiting for Godot revolutionized theater.  Several decades after directing 

the Actors Workshop production of Waiting for Godot in San Francisco, Herbert Blau stated, “I 

think the hardest thing to reconstruct, now that Beckett has been deified among American theater 

people, particularly academics, is just how startling those plays were” (Blau cited in Bradby 

2001: 97).  Perhaps the most novel element of Waiting for Godot is that it lacks a true plot.  As 

the title indicates, Godot is a play in two acts, yet the structure of the second repeats the first.  

Instead of development, the structure of Waiting for Godot is “cyclical and static” (Bradby 2001: 

36).  In the first act, Estragon and Vladimir meet on a road and commence waiting for Godot to 

arrive.  The setting is simple; as mentioned previously, the stage directions indicate only “A 

country road.  A tree.  Evening.”  Like clowns and music-hall performers, Vladimir and Estragon 

banter in the form of a “cross-talk act” which features interruptions, unfinished stories, double 

meanings, and misunderstandings (Bradby 2001: 43).  Eventually Lucky, burdened by packages 

and with a rope around his neck, and Pozzo, holding a whip, enter the stage.  Pozzo bosses 

Lucky with commands such as “Up pig!” (Beckett [1954] 1982: 20).  These two couples are the 

main figures in the play, but they are not typical dramatic characters.  They lack reliable personal 

 

67

histories and evidence of internal life.  Bradby argues that “it is best to approach each of the pairs 

of characters as two halves of a single theatrical dynamic” (2001: 29).  Pozzo and Lucky depict 

an interdependent master-slave relationship while Vladimir and Estragon are cross-talk 

performers whose symbiotic relationship takes on many shades depending on the performance, 

including friends, an old married couple, or two comedians (Bradby 2001: 30).  Toward the end 

of Act I, a boy comes to announce that Mr. Godot will not “come this evening but surely to-

morrow” (Beckett [1954] 1982: 55).  In Act II, the set and the actors appear physically 

diminished; Pozzo is now blind.  As the play ends, Vladimir and Estragon discuss committing 

suicide but decide to wait to see if Godot will come tomorrow.  In their last exchange, they 

decide to go, yet the stage direction reads, “They do not move” (Beckett [1954] 1982: 109). 

Typically in drama and literature, meaning is delivered via standard elements such as the 

progression of the plot, the topic of the play, and character development.  Actions happen in 

sequence, building toward an end and a resolution from which meaning or a lesson may be 

gleaned.  Static instead of progressing, Godot does not allow for meaning to be “read off” the 

plot (Bradby 2001: 24).  Godot also evades a structure of being directly “about” something; the 

play lacks a referent.  It has no inherent setting, time period, or message.  Ibsen’s A Doll’s House 

is about marriage in the 19th century. Waiting for Godot resists that sort of telling.  Characters 

wait on a road, but the object of their desire never arrives.  Further, it is not clear who or what 

“Godot” is.  Throughout his life, Beckett insisted that “Godot” was not a stand-in for God and if 

he “knew who Godot was” he would have said so in the play (Bair 1978: 382; Schneider 1967: 

55).  Although the figure of Godot is the focus of many audience members and critics, Martin 

Esslin argues that waiting, rather than Godot, is the subject of the play ([1961] 1980: 50).  

However, it is not only about waiting in a standard sense.  Beckett’s Godot depicts on stage the 

 

68

existential experience of waiting.  One place to find a meaning offered by Godot is its 

presentation of the human—painfully, comically human—experience of time.  

The last pairing of utterance and stage direction in the play, when the travelers decide to 

go yet do not move, is an example of Beckett’s treatment of the themes of movement and stasis 

in such a way as to unsettle meaning.  Dialogue and action work at cross-purposes, creating an 

effect nearly impossible to produce with prose.  This double gesture—at once toward movement 

and toward stasis—is one last destabilizing move in Godot; the end of the play, and thus the 

“meaning” in a standard sense, is left open.  Or, perhaps, it indicates that the meaning cannot be 

fixed or resolved.  Beckett himself inveterately declined to illuminate the “meanings” and 

symbolism of his plays.  The director of the first American production who developed a personal 

relationship with the playwright explains that Beckett preferred to “let the supposed ‘meanings’ 

fall where they may….” (Schneider 1967: 55).  As I will discuss in detail, the meanings of 

Waiting for Godot do not only passively “fall” where they may; social actors and the audience 

actively write meanings of their trauma into Beckett’s play.       

       
“The play struck such different chords in its various audiences…” (Bradby 2001: 2)  
 
 

Roger Blin directed the first performance of Waiting for Godot at the Théâtre de 

Babylone in Paris in 1953.  Beginning with that inaugural performance, critics, journalists and 

academics have expressed considerable interest and anxiety over whether performances of the 

Godot would be “understood” and received favorably by audiences and critics.  In fact, before 

Blin agreed to stage Waiting for Godot at the Babylone, the play was rejected by several 

producers in Paris who cited concern that it was “incomprehensible, boring, too highbrow, or too 

deep” (Bair 1978: 397).  Despite the concerns, the first production in Paris proved extremely 

 

69

successful, running for four hundred performances at the Babylone before transferring to another 

theater in Paris (Esslin [1961] 1980: 39).   

Over the course of several decades, concerns that the avant-garde qualities of the play 

would prevent positive audience reception of the play largely fell off.  Despite fears—which 

proved to be well-founded in some cases—that early audiences would not understand or connect 

with the play, Waiting for Godot has been staged extensively throughout the world.68  Its success 

helped propel Beckett to his position as one of the most prominent literary figures of the 

twentieth century, and, in turn, his literary fame conferred legitimacy on the play.  The 

revolutionary, avant-garde play is now a classic drama.  Although the initial anxieties that 

audiences would not understand or respond positively to the play subsided as it achieved the 

status of classic, those concerns were replaced by others.  Critics and academics now express 

concern that Waiting for Godot has lost its “provocative quality” and has become a “safe bet” to 

stage (Bradby 2001: 162).  However, critics, journalists, and academics have long identified 

performances where their anxieties about reception are much less—or even ceased to be—of 

concern for reasons external to the logic of the theater.  When Godot was feared to be too dark or 

too high-brow, audiences understood it.  And when critics and academics feared Godot is merely 

a mundane classic emptied of its theatrical surprises, audiences felt a vibrant connection to the 

                                                 
68 The first production in the United States was, in the words of the director, a “spectacular flop” (Schneider 1967: 
56).  Staged in Miami, the producers advertised Waiting for Godot as the “the laugh sensation of two continents” 
starring the well-known comic actors Bert Lehr and Tom Ewell (Bradby 2001: 93).  Bradby assesses that Lehr and 
Ewell and the director doomed the production by playing up the comedic aspects of the play and making the tragic 
elements palatable.  Schneider, the director, attributes the production’s failure to the audience’s expectation of 
attending a light comedy (Schneider 1967: 56).  Due to the “disastrous” run in Miami, Godot’s first opening New 
York City was canceled (Bradby 2001: 93).  After reorganizing the production and replacing the director and some 
of the actors, Godot opened on Broadway in April 1956 (Bradby 2001: 93).  The production in Miami is the first of 
several examples of Waiting for Godot failing to some degree when it was used primarily as a star vehicle or to earn 
large profits for the theater and production company.  A critic for The New York Times reports that the Broadway 
production featuring Robin Williams and Steve Martin as Vladimir and Estragon in 1988 “rode into town on tidal 
waves of hype” (Rich 1988).  However, the show proved “utterly impersonal” and turned Godot into “the stage 
equivalent of a buddy film” (Rich 1988).  Instances of failed or less successful Godot productions underscore the 
interest of productions that succeed. 

 

70

play.  In the beginning of Beckett: Waiting for Godot, Bradby attributes the varied receptions of 

the play to variations in the logic of the theater: “It was understood (and misunderstood) 

differently in the different theatrical cultures (2001: 2).”  Yet, later in the book, he joins other 

critics and academics in acknowledging that the unique history of performances and audience 

reception of Waiting for Godot goes beyond the logic of the theater.  In “situations of political 

oppression” the canonical drama has “special relevance” and becomes provocative once again 

(2001: 162).    

 

  Susan Sontag’s production of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo during the siege in the 

summer of 1993 is one of the productions in “situations of political oppression” cited by Bradby.  

In “Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo,” Sontag articulates that the relevance and resonance of 

Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo was obvious.  During her first visit to Sarajevo the preceding 

spring, Sontag spoke with a director and producer about coming back to the city to direct a play.  

When he asked which play she would direct, Sontag recalls: 

 

And bravado, following the impulsiveness of my proposal, 
suggested to me in an instant what I might not have seen had I 
taken longer to reflect: there was one obvious play for me to direct.  
Beckett’s play, written over forty years ago, seems written for, and 
about Sarajevo. (1994: 88) 

 
 
Why did Sontag, a social critic and literary figure with countless dramas to choose from, realize 

“in an instant” that Waiting for Godot was written for and about the situation in Sarajevo?  How 

is it that Godot, a play which cannot properly be said to be “about” anything, could be about the 

violence and suffering in that city?   

In Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo: Theological Reflections on Nihilism, Tragedy, and 

Apocalypse, David Toole (1998) weaves together philosophy, theology, sociology, and 

 

71

contemporary politics to explain that Sontag and her audience in Sarajevo turned to Waiting for 

Godot as a way to reflect on the atrocities of the twentieth century.  Violence in Sarajevo book-

ended the century: the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand began World War I and the citizens 

of Sarajevo suffered a violent siege, during which thousands died and many more suffered from 

malnutrition and gripping fear, at the dusk of the bloody century (Toole 1998: xiii).  Toole 

reflects:      

 

I can imagine that to witness a performance of Godot in Sarajevo 
in 1993 would have been to meet head-on the question of what 
such a century might mean—or rather, the question of whether 
meaning itself could possibly survive a century such as this. 
(Author’s emphasis 1998: 19) 
 

 
In Sarajevo in 1993, Waiting for Godot was not merely a classic of the theater; here the play 

seemed ultimately relevant to the situation.  Bradby identified the resonance and labeled it 

“political oppression.”  Recognizing the same resonance, Toole attributed the “remarkable 

convergence of text and world” to understanding atrocity in the twentieth century (Toole 1998: 

4).  

In certain contexts—variously labeled political oppression or atrocity—concerns that 

critics, academics and journalists normally have about Godot lose their importance.  Instead of 

worrying whether Godot will be understood, critics and journalists reports it has “struck an 

instant chord” with the audience (Bradby 2001: 102).  Instead of worrying about whether it has 

been performed too much, it seems instantly obvious to stage it and no other play (Sontag 1994: 

88).  These critics identify what, in the theory of social performance and cultural pragmatics, is 

conceptualized as “re-fusion” (Alexander, Giesen and Mast 2006).  In complex, mass mediated 

society, social life has been “de-fused” (Alexander 2006: 29).  Rituals, which rely on shared 

 

72

meanings and cultural understandings, are rare.  However, social actors in our complex social 

world continue to communicate the meanings of their social experiences through social 

performance.  Cultural pragmatics takes as its goal to demonstrate “how social performance, 

whether individual or collective, can be analogized systemically to theatrical ones” (Alexander 

2006: 29).  I argue that the theatrical performance of Waiting for Godot is a social performance 

in contexts of trauma.  In contexts of trauma, audiences seem to understand Godot and its deeply 

provocative qualities.  This “re-fusion” transcends the logic of the theater; audiences not only 

“enjoy” or “appreciate” the play, but it “speaks to” and “speaks for” their social situations.  In 

these contexts, Godot is not only a theatrical performance; it is a social performance.   

Instead of the numerous explanations for fusion in these contexts, I offer one: productions 

of Waiting for Godot have achieved fusion in contexts of trauma.  To label these circumstances 

of “trauma” is more than a parsimonious solution for understanding the circumstances in which 

Waiting for Godot is something other—something more—than an avant-garde play or a classic 

drama.  A close study of the productions of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo and New Orleans will 

contribute to our understandings of social trauma theories.  First examining these productions 

will help to clarify the relationship between collective trauma, a concept describing communities 

affected by disasters, and cultural trauma which argues that trauma is not born but made.  On the 

theoretical level, I will argue that collective trauma theorizes important elements of mood and 

emotion, but we must remain theoretically vigilant that it is not events which are traumatic but it 

is our construction of occurrences as traumatic to cultural structures and expectations that make 

them so.  Further, looking at productions of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo and New Orleans will 

illustrate the ways in which claims to trauma through construction and narration may be made 

performatively rather than factually.  By staging Waiting for Godot, social actors define the 

 

73

trauma—what the trauma means to the community, who are the victims, and who are the 

perpetrators—using aesthetics and performative acts rather than evidence such as testimony, 

dates of events, numbers of the dead, and cost of destruction.        

 
Trauma Theory: Mood and Meaning  
 
 

Waiting for Godot has been staged in many contexts of trauma or potential trauma 

(Smelser 2004: 35&36); indeed, there have been too many to adequately address here.  Godot 

has been performed in prisons in the United States and Sweden, in Haifa with references to the 

plight of Palestinians in Israel, and South Africa during Apartheid by a mixed-race cast (Bradby 

2001).  The very first performance of Godot at the Théâtre de Babylone followed shortly after 

World War II and the Nazi occupation of France.  I will discuss at length two other performances 

in trauma contexts: in Sarajevo during the siege and in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina.  

 

Academic and clinical work on trauma began in the realm of psychiatry; Freud was the 

most famous early theorists of trauma (Smelser 2004: 32).  Sociologists have specified two more 

main types of trauma: collective (or social) trauma and cultural trauma.  Kai Erikson’s seminal 

study of Buffalo Creek, an Appalachian mining community almost entirely physically destroyed 

by a flood of mining sludge, defines and illustrates the central elements of collective trauma 

(1976).  Collective trauma holds as its main tenet that “one can speak of traumatized 

communities as something distinct from assemblies of traumatized persons” (Erikson 1995: 185).  

In his précis on cultural trauma, Jeffrey Alexander acknowledges Erikson’s important 

contribution of conceptualizing trauma as a collective as well as individual phenomenon, but he 

criticizes Erikson for holding a “naturalistic perspective” in which trauma is treated as a quality 

inherent in certain events due to their sudden, devastating, violent, or shocking nature (2004: 2-

4).  Later in his career, Erikson seems to argue for a less-naturalistic position for collective 

 

74

trauma.  In “Notes on Trauma and Community,” an essay reflecting on his decades of fieldwork 

and study of disasters and collective trauma, Erikson points out that his dictionary defines 

“trauma” as a “a stress or blow that may produce disordered feelings or behavior” and “the state 

or condition produced by such a stress or blow” (1995: 184).  Erikson encourages his readers to 

shift their emphasis to the latter definition “because it is how people react to them rather than 

what they are that give events whatever traumatic quality they can be said to have” (Author’s 

emphasis 1995: 184).  Cultural trauma goes further, arguing that trauma is produced when 

members of collectivities successfully construct and narrate an event or a series of events as 

significantly and indelibly undermining part or all of their culture and system of meanings 

(Alexander et al 2004: especially 10 & 38).  Groups make claims to injury and trauma in the 

“trauma process” of constructing and narrating trauma between the event and its representation 

(Alexander 2004: 11).  It is in this process of claims-making that the production of Waiting for 

Godot represents, speaks for, and specifies the trauma in Sarajevo and New Orleans.    

In addition to denying that traumas are born fully-formed and specified, we must also 

unsettle the idea of the “collective” in collective trauma.  Collective trauma signals that a group 

imagined to constitute a “collective” suffers a trauma together.  However, this “collective” may 

or may not have been experienced as a community or a collective before the traumatic 

occurrence.  The collective trauma, therefore, can form or refigure the collective—its 

membership, bonds, mutual responsibilities, and stance toward outsiders.  We should think of 

Erikson’s “traumatized communities” as a collective that has, in a Durkheimian sense, a reality 

and a set of logics external to individuals.  It is this Durkheimian collective which experiences 

social trauma.  Erikson argues that “trauma damages the texture of community” (1995:187) in 

 

75

two ways: by damaging social bonds and by creating a social climate of trauma.  Specifying the 

latter sense of damage to the community, Erikson (1995) writes: 

 

…traumatic experiences work their way so thoroughly into the 
grain of the affected community that they come to supply its 
prevailing mood and temper, dominate its imagery and its sense of 
self, govern the way its members relate to one another. (Emphasis 
added, p.190) 

 
 
Collective trauma is primarily a concept of emotion rather than, like cultural trauma, a concept of 

cognition and meaning construction.  Erikson argues against a common and rather 

sentimentalized vision that communities experiencing trauma enjoy a “wave of good feeling” 

when they realize that they and their community have survived the initial disaster (1995: 189).  

Erikson flatly states that he has never witnessed this sort of euphoria in any of his fieldwork nor 

read about it in the recent literature.  Instead, collective trauma is characterized by a loss of 

community bonds, lack of trust in the future and in ones neighbors, and a collective mood of fear 

and depression (Erikson 1976).  Although we must be clear in our understanding of the concept 

of collective trauma and the language we use to describe it, I contend that collective trauma 

remains an important sociological concept for understanding when and how communities and 

collectives experience events as traumatic.  Collective trauma may or may not become a cultural 

trauma at a national or international level in a “trauma process” of articulation, narration, 

construction, and counter-construction (Alexander et al 2004).    

Erikson’s study in Buffalo Creek also indicates that collective trauma is characterized by 

perseveration on the traumatic occurrence.  In Buffalo Creek, residents lived in constant, illogical 

fear of another flood.  Many residents reported difficulty sleeping and feeling agitated and 

apprehensive when it rained (Erikson 1976: 179).  The occurrence is over, but the emotions stay 

 

76

with the individuals and shape the collective mood.  In other words, collective trauma involves a 

particular experience of time.  Days and weeks go by, but the mood of collective trauma lingers.  

When performed in these situations, Waiting for Godot expresses waiting, uncertainty, anguish 

and fear that the people experiencing collective trauma feel acutely in their daily lives.  Like 

Vladimir and Estragon, individuals and collectives experiencing collective trauma do not know 

when their situation will end.  Nor, like Beckett’s hobos, do they know what that end will look 

like in terms of the bonds of community that have been forged, challenged, and upset during the 

occurrence and the collective trauma.   

Productions of Waiting for Godot become social performance through which the 

collective can represent and communicate its present state to itself.  In addition, the collective 

may realize itself as such through a social performance of a shared emotional state and mood.  

However, productions of Waiting for Godot do not become social performances expressing 

trauma on their own.  Claims to trauma do not speak for themselves.  There is a “need for 

walking and talking—and seeing and listening to the walking and talking” which theater and 

social performance, and theater as social performance, can provide (Alexander 2006: 33).  Social 

performances, like theater performances, require actors, audiences, scripts and settings.  Social 

actors perform and multiple audiences—the in-person audience, journalists, and media 

consumers—observe and interpret the social performance of trauma via Waiting for Godot.  It is 

to these performances that I now turn.   

 

Performing Trauma to Multiple Audiences 
 

Beckett intended Waiting for Godot to “avoid definition” (Bradby 2001: 17).  

Productions of Godot honoring Beckett’s intentions could express the “mood and temper” of 

collective trauma.  However, as we will see, productions of Waiting for Godot in contexts of 

 

77

collective trauma have gone beyond mood to articulate the meaning of the situation and the 

identity of “the players.”  In these performances, directors, actors, journalists, and attendees 

inject the famously “meaningless” avant-garde play with meanings relevant to their situation.  

The productions specify the victims, the perpetrators, and the meanings of the trauma itself.  The 

first production of Waiting for Godot provides a good example.  David Bradby (2001) reports 

that audiences in Paris were particularly horrified by the Pozzo-Lucky couple which was read as 

a Nazi-victim pair:   

 

No doubt a sense of horror was provoked as much by the attitude 
of Pozzo as by the appearance and behavior of Lucky.  Memories 
of the Nazi occupation were still fresh in people’s minds.  Indeed 
the full horror of the death camps had emerged only gradually in 
the postwar years.  The image of a poor, broken-down slave, 
suffering from a terminal medical condition but obliged to 
continue to perform whatever tasks he could still manage by an 
arrogant master, was not very far removed from realities which 
were only too vivid in the memories of many in the audience. (p. 
62)  
 

 
Bradby indicates that the director, Blin, encouraged the audience to read Pozzo as a Nazi by 

emphasizing the class differences between the two (Bradby 2001: 62).  Of course, the “full 

horror” of the death camps continued to be given meaning long after the performance of Godot 

in Paris.  An interesting question to pose—one which we probably cannot answer now—is how 

members of the Parisian audience understood the figure of Lucky in 1953.  If Pozzo represented 

a cruel and demanding Nazi, who did Lucky represent?  Was he a Jew, a prisoner of a 

Concentration Camp, or was he a Parisian during the Occupation?  We do know that Beckett’s 

potentially generic master-slave pair was rendered and read in Paris as a reference to the 

collective trauma of Parisians at the time.  And, further, the performance of Pozzo as a Nazi 

indicated the perpetrator of the trauma.  

 

78

Beckett was part of this “collective” in Paris after the war.  When he returned to Paris 

after years of interminable waiting, Beckett found his beloved city and his relationships with 

friends and colleagues irrevocably changed by the war (Bair 1978: 373).  As a text, Waiting for 

Godot was born out of Beckett’s personal trauma and the mood of collective trauma in Paris 

following the war.  However, as discussed previously, Beckett explicitly includes neither the war 

nor any other referent in his play.  In addition to lacking a referent, literary scholars have argued 

that Beckett revolutionized the narrative logic of drama.  As I discussed previously, Godot resists 

standard plot progression; the play presents an experience of waiting and time rather than being 

“about” anything.  Godot’s arrival, what is expected to “happen” in a standard sense, is denied to 

the characters and the audience.  However, from the first performance, audiences and directors 

undermined Beckett’s intentions to stage a “meaningless” play defying definitions and 

interpretation.  Against the grain of Beckett’s narrative logic, audiences and producers insert 

meanings into the play by specifying victims, perpetrators, and the nature of their trauma.  

The central contribution of cultural trauma is the insistence that occurrences are not 

automatically traumatic; events must become traumatic.  Groups must construct and narrate 

events and their aftermath as threatening or damaging to the meaning structures which underpin, 

and indeed constitute, the collective.  Individuals and groups construct and contest the meaning 

of events in institutions such as courts, parliaments and the media (Alexander 2004: 15-20).  The 

media play a crucial role as journalists and intellectuals report and interpret the construction and 

contestation of trauma narratives in other institutional realms.  In addition to reporting strict 

“facts” such as numbers of the dead, the cost of destruction, and the transcripts of judicial and 

legislative hearings, journalists and writers may “expressively dramatize” traumas in the mass 

media (Alexander 2004: 18).   

 

79

The capacity of the media to convey, interpret, and judge constructions and narrations of 

trauma is critical in the social performance of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo and New Orleans.  

The media constitutes an audience to the social performance along with the audience which was 

physically present at the performances of the play in those cities.  Valentin Rauer argues that the 

presence of multiple layers of audience is an essential feature of social performance (2006: 260).  

Social performances require actors to creatively perform and audiences to interpret the 

performance.  Further, the audience does not consist only in Goffman’s dichotomous front stage 

and back stage (2006: 259).  In societies with mass media, there are layers of audiences who 

witness, describe, interpret, and judge social performances: there is an in-person audience, the 

media audience that encodes the performance, and the media consumers who hear or read about 

their reports (Rauer 2006: 260).   

Rauer identifies these three layers of audience in his case study of the performative act of 

German Chancellor Willy Brandt’s kniefall at the monument to those who suffered and died in 

the Warsaw Ghetto (2006).  Rauer disaggregates the audience of social performance analytically 

to understand the different ways audiences contribute to the social performance or diffuse it 

through their actions and interpretations.  In other words, social performance requires fusion with 

all layers of audience to become a salient performance.  However, Rauer does not discuss the 

ability of social actors to shape how the audience, including the journalistic audience, receives 

and perceives the social performance.  Using Rauer’s three layers of audience is useful for 

analyzing the interpretations of meaning by the various audiences for the productions of Waiting 

for Godot.  Further, I will show that analytically disaggregating the layers of audience 

illuminates different performative strategies of the social actors who produced and directed 

Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo and New Orleans. 

 

80

The first-order audience consists of the spectators who are present for the performance 

(Rauer 260).  Social performances always entail action rather than description, and an audience, 

usually one that is physically present, must witness the act (Rauer 2006: 259).  The in-person 

audience reacts in real time to an action happening in their physical space.  Journalists and 

critics, the second-order audience, must report and interpret an occurrence for it to achieve social 

and cultural importance, for an occurrence to become a salient social event (Mast 2006: 118).  

There is often overlap in the layers of audience (Rauer 2006: 260); indeed, some of the 

journalists who reported on the productions of Waiting for Godot in New Orleans and in 

Sarajevo physically attended a performance.  Journalists report on the performative act, 

recounting what happened and by whom.  Journalists and critics also encode the meaning of the 

event, interpreting the actions and declaring their consequence.  Journalists and critics pronounce 

a performance a “success” or a “failure.”  A social performance is a “success” on a theoretical 

level when the audience, the mise-en-scene, script, and the actors achieve “re-fusion” (Alexander 

2006)  To achieve re-fusion, a social performance must be perceived as spontaneous rather than 

calculated, authentic not manufactured (Rauer 2006: 275).  Journalists and critics indicate the 

success or failure of a performance using these criteria, and by citing and interpreting the 

reactions of the in-person audience.  When the reactions—laughter, gasps, comments, silence, 

and tears—of the first-order audience are encoded and conveyed by journalists, those who are 

present are simultaneously audience and actors in the social performance (Rauer 2006: 260).    

Journalists and critics encode the meanings of the performance for the third-order 

audience, media consumers.  The third-order audience reads reports in newspapers and blogs, 

hears about the performance on the radio, and sees visual representations of it on television and 

the internet.  An occurrence becomes an event, and action becomes social performance, in part 

 

81

through the sheer dissemination to a wide third-order audience.  The third-order audience “more 

or less depend” upon the interpretations of the journalists and critics and their assessment of 

performative success or failure (Rauer 2006: 260).  However, the third-order audience is not 

populated by passive consumers; they will also interpret the meaning of the performance and 

form their own opinions of its authenticity and consequence.  Nevertheless, their reactions are 

notoriously difficult for social analysts to capture.  It is the meanings as they are actively 

received by the third-order audience that they will mobilize in future decisions and actions such 

as in opinion polls and political action.       

In Sarajevo during the siege and in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina social actors—

directors, producers, and stage actors—appealed to all three layers of audience in their social 

performance of trauma through the theatrical production of Beckett’s Waiting for Godot.  In 

these locations, the play expresses the mood of collective trauma in Erickson’s sense.  However, 

the metaphor of waiting does not speak for itself.  The social actors make claims to trauma by 

inserting references to the nature of the trauma, the vicitims, and the perpetrators into Beckett’s 

referent-free avant-garde play.  These references specify and construct the trauma for the 

individuals who are living through the traumatic occurrence as well for the wider public from 

whom those claiming trauma seek recognition and solidarity.   

 
Sarajevo 
 
 

Susan Sontag, the American writer and public intellectual, traveled to Sarajevo in 1993 to 

direct Waiting for Godot as the city’s residents were being ravaged by indiscriminate violence, 

power outages, and widespread hunger.  Sontag’s production featured a local producer, Haris 

Pasovic, and local theater actors.  Sontag appealed to three layers of audience through her 

performative project: those who attended the performances in the Youth Theater in Sarajevo in 

 

82

August 1993, the journalists who wrote about the production, and the individuals who heard and 

read those accounts.  The production made claims to trauma through the production of the play 

that resonated and appealed to each level.  I will discuss how Sontag and the other social actors 

involved in the production appealed to each layer of audience and the ways in which the play 

achieved, or was said to achieve, re-fusion.  Of course there was overlap in strategies of 

appealing to and interpretation by the layers of audience: what the production of Waiting for 

Godot meant, or was said to mean, to the people of Sarajevo affects what it means, or what it is 

said to mean, to the audiences beyond the city. 

 

How was the production of Godot experienced and interpreted by the people in Sarajevo 

during the summer of 1993?  To analyze the first-order audience almost two decades after the 

performance without having been present at the performance, I must rely on the accounts of the 

social actor’s involved: principally what Sontag wrote about her production and on comments by 

residents of Sarajevo as they are quoted by journalists.  Artistic culture, European identity, and 

feeling abandoned by their fellow Europeans were very much related for residents of Sarajevo in 

the summer of 1993.  Sarajevo’s residents who had sustained a vibrant intellectual and cultural 

life based in European artistic traditions were now living without electricity or proper food and 

were in constant fear for their lives.  Many of them felt that their European neighbors allowed 

them to suffer by their reticence to intervene in the violence.  Under ongoing attack, residents 

bitterly recognized that cultural solidarity with Europe did not extend to political solidarity.  The 

intellectuals and artists with whom many residents of the city felt an affiliation largely 

abandoned the cause of the Sarajevans.  Boujan Zec, a Sarajevan journalist, was quoted in The 

Guardian: “Writers like Hemingway risked their lives for liberty in Spain. Now all that Europe 

 

83

can do is send us a few packets of aid.”69  By participating in the production of Godot, the actors, 

theater support staff, and first-order audience members reinforced for themselves their collective 

identity as civil, cultured Europeans worthy of being saved from “savage” violence.  The actor 

Velibor Topic, who played one of the Estragons, was also quoted in The Guardian: “There is not 

only fighting on the front line. We must tell the world that we are not animals. We are cultured, 

we have ideas and dreams.”70  The production of Waiting for Godot and the media attention it 

generated was a way to showcase that culture and civility persevered in Sarajevo.  As Velibor 

indicates, the production of Waiting for Godot, a well-known and respected play, articulated their 

collective identity as civilized Europeans to the residents of Sarajevo. The production was 

intended to articulate the same collective identity to audiences outside the city.   

 

The residents of Sarajevo were also widely quoted by journalists and by Sontag saying 

that Waiting for Godot made sense to perform in their historical moment because they, too, were 

waiting.  They were waiting for in intervention by the United States, President Clinton, the 

United Nations, and their European neighbors.  John Pomfret includes one of the actor’s 

reflections on the figure of Godot in his article for the Washington Post: “You never know when 

something is going to come crashing down and blow your head apart…  That's my own personal 

Godot.”71  Using the same sort of language as the academic David Bradby when he identified 

Godot’s “special relevance,” a British reporter writes, “The play's message has touched a chord 

among Sarajevans beyond the tiny theatre-going public. ‘I hear Ms Sontag is waiting for Godot - 

we are are waiting for the Europeans and the Americans,’ commented Jovan Divjak, a Bosnian 

                                                 
69 Narayan, Natasha. 1993. “A Candle in the Dark.” The Guardian, August 20, p. 2.  
70 Narayan. 1993. The Guardian, August 20. 
71 Pomfret, John. 1993. “‘Godot’ Amid the Gunfire; In Bosnia, Sontag’s Take on Beckett.”  The Washington Post, 
August 19, C1.   

 

84

army chief. ‘Did Godot ever show up?’”72  The residents waited for an uncertain end to the 

violence, and the production of Godot is a way to express their status to those for whom they 

wait. 

 

The journalists and critics, including Sontag herself, who wrote about the production of 

Godot in Sarajevo largely focused on the desperation in Sarajevo and how apt the metaphor of 

waiting was for the residents’ situation.  Soon after returning to the United States in the early fall 

of 1993, Sontag wrote two similar essays about her experience directing the play in the 

beleaguered city.  Published in the New York Review of Books and the Performing Arts Journal, 

Sontag targeted her reflections and interpretations of the performance to an elite, intellectual, and 

largely American audience.  In “Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo,” Sontag wrote that she traveled 

to Sarajevo to direct a production of Waiting for Godot in order to “pitch in and do something” 

(1994: 87).  Although Sontag insisted that she could not go to Sarajevo merely to act as a witness 

to the violence, she is that too.  In her essay, she provides details about life in the city that read 

like an ethnographic account.  Sontag describes the emotional tableau of collective trauma, 

stringing together observations that echo Erikson’s fieldwork in Buffalo Creek:   

 

…many Sarajevans are reluctant to leave their apartments except 
when it is absolutely necessary…though no one is safe anywhere, 
they have more fear when they are in the street.  And beyond fear, 
there is depression—most Sarajevans are very depressed—which 
produces lethargy, exhaustion, apathy. (1994:90) 
    
 

Further, Sontag reports that the residents are “waiting, hoping, not wanting to hope,” and they 

are “humiliated” (1994: 91).  The forces promoting what Erikson called the “prevailing mood 

and temper” of collective trauma were constant; the real danger had not subsided in Sarajevo.  

Snipers threatened to kill people on the street and in their homes.  Residents lacked electricity, 

                                                 
72 Tanner, Marcus. 1993. “A Long Wait for Godot.” The Independent, August 2, p. 1.   

 

85

and waited in lines to receive daily rations of food and water from the United Nations.  Sontag 

notes that her actors suffered from fatigue and malnutrition; a formerly overweight actress lost 

more than sixty pounds during the war.  The newspaper accounts of the situation in Sarajevo and 

of the plight of the individuals in the social and professional circle of the theater mention many 

of the same details that Sontag includes in her essays.     

 

The second-order audience, the journalists, established that Godot was, in fact, an apt 

metaphor in large part by describing the reactions of the actors and the audience in the theater.  

Many journalists describe what happened and interpret the mood in Youth Theater during the 

performances by mentioning particular details such as what materials appeared on stage, what 

the actors wore, and how the house was lit.  I quote John Burns of the New York Times:  

A charged silence settled over the theater as actors and audience 
took a long, painful pause, digesting a message of hope deceived 
that is a defining passage of a new dramatic production performed 
here for the first time on Tuesday.  To hear the silence of the 
packed house in the small theater in the city center was to feel the 
grief and disappointment that weigh on Sarajevo as it nears the end 
of its second summer under siege.73 

   
 
By declaring a match between the situation “on the ground” and the play using the stunned, 

silent, pensive, and emotional reaction of the in-person audience as evidence, the journalists 

declared Waiting for Godot a performative “success.”  The journalists indicated to their reading 

and listening audience that Godot re-fused the setting, script, audience, and actors into a shared 

experience of meaning.  They conveyed that everyone in Sarajevo understand exactly what 

Godot meant and why it was important to perform in Sarajevo at that moment.  And, 

importantly, during the performance of the play, performed around the world so many times 

before, the Sarajevan audience saw not only a classic dramatic work; they saw themselves.        

 

86

 

The journalists and critics who described and interpreted the production of Waiting for 

Godot conveyed to their listening and reading audience how apt the metaphor was for waiting, 

uncertainty, and anxiety in Sarajevo.  Many journalists repeated variations on the statement “The 

metaphor of waiting for intervention was well understood.”74  Often, they established the 

resonance of Godot by describing that the in-person audience was riveted by the performance, 

collectively understanding its significance in their place and time.  However, Beckett’s script and 

the metaphor of waiting did not speak unaided for the trauma of the Sarajevans.  Sontag and the 

actors changed significant elements of Beckett’s play including the set, the characters, and the 

length of the play to signify their circumstance and to narrate their trauma for the audience 

beyond the besieged city.  Such changes would be notable in almost any dramatic performance, 

but insertions into the play to establish the meaning of the situation is additionally surprising in 

Godot.  Beckett and his estate are (in)famously inflexible, rarely allowing productions to deviate 

from Beckett’s authorial intentions for the staging of his plays.75  More importantly for this 

study, by specifying the nature and players in a trauma the social actors insert a referent into a 

play that does not carry one of its own. 

 

Instead of one pair of protagonists, Sontag staged three pairs of Vladimirs and Estragons 

as “three variations on the theme of the couple” with one mixed gender, one male, and one 

female couple.  She reports she made the decision, at least in part, to “employ”—a symbolic 

rather than monetary concept—more actors (1994: 92).  However, a journalist quotes her 

explaining to her actors: “Beckett was still thinking in that old way of thinking; that if these 

                                                                                                                                                             
73 Burns, John F. 1993. “To Sarajevo, Writer Brings Good Will and ‘Godot.’” The New York Times, August 19.   
74 Narayan. 1993. The Guardian, August 20. 
75 See, for example, 1993. “Waiting for Godette.” The Times, September 1, Features. This news piece states that 
Sontag’s “real accomplishment” is staging Godot with female actresses while the Beckett estate sues other 
productions for the same substitution.    

 

87

characters are to be representative then they should be men.”76  In addition to lightening the 

burden on her exhausted and malnourished actors, Sontag explains that the extra pairs of 

travelers have the symbolic value of representing both men and women, male and female 

Sarajevans who wait for Godot alike and together.  Pomfret, writing for The Washington Post, 

declares: “This troika succeeds on the stage as each pair -- two women, two men, and a man and 

a woman -- explore different parts of the waiting game as they inhabit a world garnished with 

ammo boxes, sandbags and a hospital bed -- part of the spiritual architecture of life in 

Sarajevo.”77  Here, in addition to declaring the representation of all Sarajevans a success, 

Pomfret also indicates that the production introduced meanings of trauma into the set of Godot 

which is usually exceedingly sparce.  David Bradby argues that the most important aspect of the 

setting of Godot is its “neutrality: it provides an empty space, neither historically conditioned nor 

socially appropriated” (2001: 34).  However, Sontag’s actors presented Waiting for Godot “on a 

stage lit by candles, and with Red Cross boxes and UN sandbags as props…”78  In one of her 

nods to Beckett in her essay, Sontag comments that her staging was “as minimally furnished, I 

thought, as Beckett himself could have desired” (1994: 96).  She fails to mention the war 

paraphernalia invoking the Red Cross and The United Nations, material representations of 

trauma, decorating the stage.   

  

Sontag only staged the first act of the play.  In her essay on the production, she points out 

that the first act is “itself a complete play” without the repetition and the stasis of the second act 

(1994: 97).  She reports that she decided to stage only the first half of the play because her actors 

and audience could not sustain energy for a longer performance.  However, Sontag undermined 

                                                 
76 Eagar, Charlotte. 1993. “Radical-Chic Sontag Waits for Godot as Shells Shake Theatre of the Absurd.” The 
Observer, July 25, p. 13.   
77 Pomfret. 1993. The Washington Post, August 19.   

 

88

her explanation of this as a logistical, value-free decision in comments to the first- and second-

order audiences.  Pomfret attended a performance in Sarajevo where Sontag announced:  “Its 

correct title, then, is ‘Waiting for Godot: Act 1.’  We are all waiting for Act 2.”79  Of course, 

Beckett’s Godot never arrives.  Sontag’s Godot may still arrive in the Act 2 that is yet to unfold.  

Until he arrives—and perhaps even if he does—he is a guilty party in their trauma.   

 

So far, it sounds very much like all the journalists agree that Waiting for Godot was the 

right play at the right time in Sarajevo and that the residents of Sarajevo responded to this 

resonance and relevance.  This is, actually, largely true.  But that is not to say that there were no 

criticisms of staging Godot in Sarajevo.  The criticisms, however, did not pertain to whether or 

not the claims made implicitly and explicitly through the play—that the Sarajevans suffer from 

deep existential uncertainty and physical decline as they wait for the United States, the United 

Nations, and their European neighbors to intervene in the violence.  Rather, whether or not the 

play will be taken as a legitimate, successful social performance of trauma hinges on whether the 

performance was spontaneous and authentic.  Specifically, the motivations and actions of Susan 

Sontag coming to the beleaguered city to direct the play was at issue for the layers of audiences.  

Simply stated, the critical question is not whether the meanings encoded by the performance are 

correct; the critical question is whether Sontag should have directed the play.   

The most direct and vehement critic, Richard Grenier, wrote that Sontag has resumed her 

“her position as the artist-moralist of the Western world” in the “limelight” of Sarajevo.80  

Grenier’s was the most ardent formulation of what occurred in whispers in other news pieces: 

did Sontag seek out this high-profile cause to boost her own career or did she seek to bring the 

                                                                                                                                                             
78 William, David. 1993. “The Great Provider: Alemko Has it all at a Price Despite the Siege.” The Daily Mail, 
August 18, p. 12.  
79 Pomfret. 1993. The Washington Post, August 19.  .   
80 Grenier, Richard. 1993. “Sarajevo and Susan’s Sweet Sensibilities.” The Washington Times, August 30, p. E3.  

 

89

world’s attention to the situation in Sarajevo?  Is it legitimate for an intellectual from the U.S. to 

travel to a war zone to direct a play?  Although these questions were certainly not uniformly 

answered or resolved, many reporters’ accounts assure the third-order audience that Sontag’s 

presence and her work in the embattled Sarajevo theater scene were welcome by the Sarajevans.  

An editor of a Sarajevo newspaper that continued to publish during the shelling, Kemal 

Kurspahic, commented on the status of Sontag: “She is not a war tourist…She has really tried to 

come here and talk to us and understand the situation.”81  The same news story states, as do 

several other reports, that Sontag declines, out of a sense of equality and solidarity, to wear her 

flak jacket.  Some reporters write that a flak jacket lies nearby the famous intellectual, but, like 

her actors, she goes without.  Weighing in on her authenticity as an artist in Sarajevo, Sontag 

tells a reporter, “You have to have some reason to be here. I'm not just a voyeur. I was invited to 

take part in a theatre festival…”82  Journalists and critics declared Sontag’s production of 

Waiting for Godot a performative success.  The meanings resonated with the situation and the 

people.  Sontag’s changes to Beckett’s stage directions were not over-done and those 

embellishments did not take away from the power of the play’s simplicity.  Sontag’s position and 

job as director were (largely) authentic and the show’s connection with the audience seemed 

spontaneous and strong.  In short, most journalists declared Waiting for Godot a successful social 

performance in Sarajevo.       

 

New Orleans  
 
 

   
Graphic and performance artist Paul Chan knew about Sontag’s production of Waiting for 

Godot in Sarajevo when he brought a production of Beckett’s play to New Orleans in November 

2007.  Chan considers his production of Godot “within the lineage of imagining what it means to 

                                                 
81 Narayan. 1993 The Guardian, August 20. 

 

90

create art in places where we ought not to have any” which includes Sontag’s production. 83  

Supported by the public art nonprofit Creative Time, Chan mounted a multifaceted expressive 

project featuring a whispering campaign and local art practices including Second line brass 

bands.  Like Sontag’s production in Sarajevo, Chan dramatizes and communicates the situation 

of the people living in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina to the city’s residents and to the 

wider world.  And like Sontag’s production, Chan and the director Christopher McElroen and the 

stage actors added specific references to their city and their situation to Beckett’s austere drama.  

In a sense, Chan had at his disposal Beckett’s script for the play as well as a script written by 

Sontag’s production, the production at San Quentin, in South Africa and elsewhere for how to 

stage Waiting for Godot as a metaphor for trauma.  In these instances, though the play is touted 

as a “perfect” and “apt” metaphor, the nature of the trauma, the perpetrators, and the victims are 

explicitly referenced via the characters, set, costumes, and other theatrical elements.  The second 

“script” of Godot as a social performance of trauma indicates what can be altered in Beckett’s 

play to make it speak for and construct the trauma at hand.  Journalists comment on this 

“lineage” and how Chan uses the script passed down to him from Sontag, the prison productions, 

and others.84  Also like the production in Sarajevo, in addition to expressive aptness which is 

required for the play to express and narrate trauma, the legitimacy of artists who direct and 

produce the play are at issue for residents and journalists.   

Chan’s production went beyond Beckett’s script and the previous productions from his 

“lineage” to mount a social performance of community and trauma.  To advertise the 

performances, Chan and his theater group posted signs including only Beckett’s first stage 

                                                                                                                                                             
82 Narayan. 1993 The Guardian, August 20. 
83 Simon, Scott. 2007. “Still Waiting on Repairs, New Orleans Hosts ‘Godot.’” Weekend Edition Saturday, National 
Public Radio, November 3.  

 

91

directions: “A country road.  A tree.  Evening.”  This whispering campaign knew no boundaries 

of class, race, or hurricane destruction; “good” and “bad” neighborhoods alike were garnished 

with the signs.85  A journalist for the New York Times describes that they “added up to a visual 

network, art as a connective tissue for a torn-apart town.”86  He interprets for his readers that the 

social bonds that were broken through the storm will be restored through art’s catharsis.  Before 

the show went up, the producer and others involved with the production hosted theater 

workshops and attended pot-luck dinners with a variety of New Orleans residents.  The Times-

Picayune’s coverage of this multifaceted art project helped to send out a casting call for local 

actors to audition for the play.87  Chan cast three actors from the Classical Theater of Harlem 

production of Waiting for Godot, including Wendell Pierce who plays Detective Moreland on the 

popular television show The Wire and is a native son of New Orleans.  Chan cast a local actor, 

Mark McLaughlin, as Lucky, and two young local actors shared the role of the Boy.88  The local 

paper also listed phone numbers to call for reservations for the show and issued a call for 

volunteers to help with various aspects of the production.89  The Times-Picayune advertised that 

at each of the free performances the audience would share a gumbo dinner before being led into 

the seating area by Second line bands.90 The play was performed at a street corner in the Lower 

Ninth Ward and in front of a destroyed house in Gentilly.  In his artist statement, Chan explains 

that staging the play outside with the brass band “connects with the city’s storied tradition of 

street performance, from Mardi Gras to the Second lines that leisurely snake through streets and 

                                                                                                                                                             
84 Simon. 2007. Weekend Edition Saturday, National Public Radio, November 3; Cotter, Holland. 2007.  “A Broken 
City.  A Tree.  Evening.” The New York Times, December 2, Section 2, p. 1.  
85 Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2.  
86 Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2. 
87 Cuthbert, David. 2007. “Katrina ‘Godot’ a Go: Wendell Pierce Set to Star in Hurricane-Themed Adaptation of 
Classic Play in New Orleans.” The Times-Picayune, September 15.  
88 Cuthbert, David. 2007. The Times-Picayune. October 26.  
89 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune. October 26. 

 

92

neighborhoods.”91  Cotter reported in the New York Times that thousands of people attended the 

shows, and an extra performance was added to accommodate audience demand.92  The first-

order audience did not merely occupy seats in a theater.  Local residents, food, and music, were 

part of the performance in New Orleans.  On the day of the first performance, the Times-

Picayune quoted Pierce exclaiming with a laugh, “We're gonna have a lot of New Orleans in 

this!”93  The local flavor surrounding the stage performance expresses to residents and to those

 

outside the city that New Orleans has a unique and vibrant culture that should not languish or 

disappe

ar.      

Much of the journalistic coverage, the comments by the second-order audience, focuse

d 

on the parallels between the characters, setting, and plot of Godot and the residents and their 

lives in New Orleans.  Holland Cotter, writing for The New York Times, comments on th

e apt 

pairing of the text and the situation in Gentilly and the Lower Ninth Ward: “Under the 

circumstances, Beckett’s words sounded less like an existentialist cri de coeur than like a ter

se 

topographic description.”94  Cotter conveys to his reader that the set of Godot which seems 

peculiarly sparce to many audiences is simple description of reality in New Orleans.  The te

xt 

and the landscape merge, but a journalist for the Times-Picayune writes that the resonance 

between the play and the situation is fully expressed only through the performance: “Many lines 

in the ‘Godot’ text take on new meaning post-Katrina, but it is not until the actors speak them

 at 

the barren intersection in the Lower 9th Ward—both blighted and beautiful—that their full 

 
                                                                                                                                                        
    
90
 Cuthbert, David. 2007. “A Play in the Street: For New Orleanians, ‘Waiting for Godot’ Hits the Spot.” The Times-
Picayune, November 2.  
91 Chan, Paul.  June 2007. “Waiting for Godot in New Orleans: An Artist Statement.” Available 
http://www.creativetime.org/programs/archive/2007/chan/artist_statement.pdf, last accessed 04/29/08.   
92 Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2. 
93 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 2. 
94 Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2. 

 

93

immediacy and import is felt.”95  Another journalist for the Times-Picayune illustrates this 

“immediacy and import” by quoting the woman he sat next to at the performance in the Ni

nth 

Ward who lives in the neighborhood.  When Estragon sat on a curb on the stage, the woman 

remarked, “He's sitting the

re like me sitting on my stoop.”96  Beckett’s characters and the 

charact

ers in the drama of Katrina wait just the same, sitting on the stoop and watching up t

he 

road for Godot to arrive.   

Like the woman in the Ninth Ward who sits on her stoop, several articles about the 

production of Godot convey that the characters in this social performance have their own 

experiences of waiting like Beckett’s hobos, the stage characters.  McLaughlin, who plays 

Lucky, told a reporter for the Times-Picayune, “I see this 'Godot' every single day on my block, 

where a Baptist church is a clearinghouse for all kinds of people in need.”97  An article in the 

Times-Picayune divulges that Pierce, the famous television and movie actor, is angry about his 

parents’ experiences tangling with government bureaucracy and “politics” to get recovery m

oney 

after losing their home during Katrina.  The reporter writes, “They [Pierce’s parents] went down 

to the office and found themselves playing an absurdist scene right out of “Godot.”98  The 

characters of the social performance of trauma go beyond the stage actors.  Radio and newspaper 

journalists introduce their third-order audience to Lower Ninth Ward resident Robert 

Green who 

lost both his mother and his granddaughter in the storm.  Chan gave Green a copy of Waiting

 for 

Godot.  At first he was skeptical of an outsider producing a play on the streets in his 

neighborhood, but after Green read the play, he left a screaming message on Chan’s answer 

 
                                                
95 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 2. 
96 MacCash, Doug. 2007. “Worth the Wait: Standing-Room Crowds Create Havoc, but 'Godot'-Goers go with the 
Flow.” The Times-Picayune, November 6.  
97 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 2. 
98 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 2. 

 

94

machine: he had to be part of the project.99  A writer for the Times-Picayune places Green in 

his 

scene on show night.  Green welcomed the play’s audience, but the journalist hesitates to say “to 

his neighbhorhood” for Green’s neighbors are gone, 

and he waits for them to come back.100  

Green is Vladimir and Estragon.  The stage actors bring Beckett’s characters to life on stage, and

 

they are bringing Green’s story to life as well.          

 

In Sarajevo, Godot was performed concurrently with the violent siege; in New Orle

ans, 

more than two years elapsed between the storm and the production of Godot.  Through the multi-

faceted social performance, the Waiting for Godot production and project in New Orleans 

articulated that the people in New Orleans continue to wait for the disaster, and the trauma, to 

end.  One way that the production articulated the residents of New Orleans as “victims” was by 

casting a mix of African-American and local actors.  The Lower Ninth Ward and Gentilly are 

predominantly black neighborhoods.  Flooding in the city and the miserably slow response fro

m 

the local, state, and federal governments disproportionately affected black neighborhood

s and 

black residents.  By casting Beckett’s travelers to “look like” the people in New Orleans, the 

production represented the identity of those who are the victims of an ongoing trauma.  

 

We can also think about the production of Waiting for Godot and the other aspects of the 

art project as a counter-performance to the rhetoric and placations that politicians have offere

d 

the residents of New Orleans.  New Orleans was the backdrop for John Edwards’s entrance int

o 

and exit from the 2008 presidential campaign, at the end of 2006 and the beginning of 2008 

respectively.  Countless other politicians and agency representatives travel to New Orleans to 

give press conferences assuring the residents and people throughout the United States that Ne

w 

Orleans is on the top of the political agenda.  There have been many improvements in the city, 

                                                
99 Simon. 2007. Weekend Edition Saturday, National Public Radio, November 3. 
100 DeBerry, Jarvis. 2007. “Waiting, Wondering? We Can Relate.” The Times-Picayune, November 6.   

 

 

95

but years after the hurricane, neighborhoods like the Lower Ninth Ward and Gentilly remain 

largely in tatters.  The counter-performance of the Waiting for Godot artistic project expresses 

and articulates their continuing trauma: the residents of the Lower Ninth Ward and Gentilly are 

still waiting, uncertain of their fate and abandoned by Godot.   

 

The second-order audience, the journalists, and the residents they interview claim that

 the 

play represents the situation of the people of the Crescent City.  Like Beckett’s hobos, they wait 

for an object of desire which they only know in a hazy form.  Who is Godot?  When is relief 

coming?  When will the city return to “normal”?  There is no dispute in any of the newspaper or 

television reports, local or national, which I surveyed that Beckett’s play uniquely represents life 

in New Orleans.  Like in Sarajevo, questions about the legitimacy of the play, and the legiti

macy 

of the social performance carried on through and around it, focus on the producers and dire

ctors 

who came to New Orleans from outside the city.  Can artists legitimately create a claim to 

someone else’s trauma?  We learn from the productions of Godot in Sarajevo and in New 

Orleans that they may if they properly engage the local population by hiring them as actors, 

costumers, and stage hands.  Chan goes beyond this to partner with various community groups; 

two separate articles in the Times-Picayune and an article in The New York Times list a long 

roster of local partners in the Godot project including high schools, universities, and comm

unity 

organizations.101  Writing for the Times-Picayune, MacCash and Cuthbert write that Chan 

made 

New Orleans his “temporary home” for the duration of the Godot project. 102   He’s not an 

insider, of course, but they convey that he is not merely a tourist-artist cashing in on New 

Orleans’s misfortunes either.  In fact, they go on to quote an art-world insider who suggests that 

 
                                                
101 Cuthbert. 2007. The Times-Picayune, September 15, Cuthbert, David. 2007. “‘Godot’ Makes the Bean Scene.” 
The Times-Picayune, October 27, and Cotter. 2007.  The New York Times, December 2.   
102 MacCash, Doug and Cuthbert, David. 2007. “Artist Paul Chan Brings his ‘Godot’ to a Waiting City.” The Times-
Picayune, November 2.  

 

96

having big-name artists and actors can be a good thing because the “power elites” of the art 

world will be at New Orleans’s “doorstep” thanks to Chan’s project.  And, indeed, national and 

international newspaper and radio journalists covered Chan’s project and, through this coverage, 

conveyed the meaning of the play and the meaning of the trauma to a wide third-order audience.
  

David Cuthbert, who covered the production over a span of two months for the Times-Pica

yune 

summed up the project’s success in 

unifying and representing the broken city and its people for 

is readers: “The haves and have-nots in New Orleans right now are those who have seen 
h

‘G

odot’ and those who haven't.”103 

 
Conclusion 
 

Claims to trauma are not always made directly in the trauma process.  Of course, they 

may be.  Political leaders deliver speeches to assign guilt and to argue for the veracity of th

eir 

claims to trauma.  Textbooks teach children the “truth” of past conflicts, specifying the aggressor 

and the victim, the trauma and the triumph.  The basic questions which must be answered 

through the trauma process—“the nature of the pain, the nature of the victim, the relation of the

 

 
trauma victim and the wider audience, and the attribution of responsiblitity” (Alexander 2004:

13-15)—are, by virtue of the status of guilt and innocence at stake, usually quite con

tentious.  

Who is to blame?  What is to be blamed for?  What should the responsible party do about it?  

Often, these questions are not posed and the answers are not given directly through 

straightforward political speech.  Claims made during the trauma process have two forms: f

actual 

truth and expressivity.  The productions of Waiting for Go

dot in Sarajevo and New Orleans are 

social p

erformances whose “success” is not achieved in the register of factual truth.  Their 

success is achieved in the register of expressive aptness.   

 
                                                
103 Cuthbert, David. 2007. “Audience Completes ‘Godot’: The Play is Not the Thing if No One is There to Hear it.” 

 

97

Some claims to trauma accuse.  Through fact-oriented speech and action, social 

actors 

indict a party as guilty or refuse blame.  Other claims to trauma reveal.  Through expressive 

performance, social actors represent the elements of trauma.  Truth and Reconciliation 

Commissions, though surely performative in some senses (cite Tanya Goodman?), appeal to 

factual and experiential truth.  Participants formally state where they were, what happened to

 

them, and by whom.  Victims name perpetrators and their crimes.  In contrast, through the case 

study of Waiting for Godot, I argue that social performance of trauma appeals to expressive

 

truth.  Individuals in Saraje

vo and New Orleans do not literally wait on a road, but the metaphor 

of wait

ing for help whose arrival is dubious and whose identity is unknown speaks for and 

narrates their trauma.        

Journalists, critics, and academics declare that Waiting for Godot is a metaphor for these 

situations.  The set is a metaphor for the bleakness of landscape following a disaster; waiting for

 

Godot is a metaphor for waiting these situations to end.  However, even the most apt metaphor

s 

do not speak for themselves.  I challenge the notion that the play simply stands for the situation 

of trauma.  Instead, I show that social actors inject the play with meanings in order to express 

their situation as a trauma.  Yet, to speak too explicitly of blame and the status of victims turns 

metaphor into bald politics.  If made explicit, claims to guilt and innocence may be accepted

 or 

rejected on the grounds of truth claims.  Like so many paintings (Picaso’s Guernica is perhaps 

the most famous example) and films (Roots

 is an American example), and other art forms, 

Waiting

 for Godot narrates the trauma and expresses charges of guilt without making accusations 

in the political realm or a court of justice.  

Productions of Waiting for Godot, as I discovered, were not judged according to factually 

accuracy.  Such a rubric simply would not make sense.  Instead, the audiences to these 

                                                                                                                                                            
The Times-Picayune, November 10.   

 

 

98

productions of Waiting for Godot pronounced the performances a success or failure based on t

he 

aptness of the expression for capturing the experiences of the residents in each city.  This is not 

only a separate rubric from other claims to trauma, but of course a different rubric of succe

ss 

than most theatrical performances.  The acting, directing, costuming, and stage design w

ere not 

based exclusively on the logic of the theater, but also on the logic of social performance.  

Audiences expected the actors to embody Vladimir and Estragon, sure, but there was a 

simultaneous expectation that they personify the residents of the cities as well.  Audiences did 

not only appreciate Godot as a literary masterpiece but as the representation of their plight.  L

ike 

Austin’s speech performatives, social performance cannot be true or false; they are “felicitous or

 

infelicitous.”  Rauer writes, “The only epistemological doubt that can be raised concerns the 

pragmatic question of whether the act is infelicitous, inadequate, or fabricated…” (2006: 259).  

Since performatives and social performance do not merely describe social reality but have the 

ability to create a new social reality, they can create social reality that other forms of action

 (e.g. 

political speeches, court trials, and awareness campaigns relying on facts as evidence) can

not.  

Questions, therefore, abound on the “adequacy of the symbol, not its truth” and regarding 

whether the correct person took the correct action (2006: 259).  The success of the social 

performance is judged in part on the aptness of the play.  Is it too intellectual?  Is it too dark?  Is 

the play overdone?  Two writers for the Times-Picayune write that if they were exposed to

 

Waiting for Godot in another circumstance they might have thought the text too high-brow, but 

in New Orleans it is perfectly apt.

104  The writers are not intimidated or bored by the play 

because it represents life in their city.  The success of the social performance also depends on 

the 

authenticity and legitimacy of the artists.   In both Sarajevo and New Orleans, Waiting for God

ot 

 
                                                
104 DeBerry. 2007. The Times-Picayune, November 6 and Maloney, Ann. 2007. “Wait with Me: N.O. May be the 
Richest Ravaged City in the World.” The Times-Picayune, November 9. 

 

99

was put on only because a famous (more so in the first case) and well-funded (more so

 in the 

second) intellectual and artist came to the city to produce the play.  Accordingly, the audience 

asks, what is the status of the imported intellectuals?  Are they grabbing attention for 

themselves?  Are they investing in the community or just putting up a production and leaving?

  

Sontag and Chan walk a performative tight-rope.  They must be able to create art that fuses with 

the local audience.  Yet to create a social performance making claims to trauma they must be

 

able to reach beyond the city, the site 

of the collective trauma, to journalists who will convey the 

social p

erformance to a national and international audience.  They must be local and global, 

speaking to and speaking for both.    

In his essay “Notes on Beauty,” Peter Schjeldahl writes, “Insensibility to beauty may b

e 

an index of misery” (1994: 59).  In contradiction to this assertion, actors, directors, producers 

and audiences seek out and shape Beckett’s Waiting for Godot to claim and specify t

rauma.  

Accounts of these productions indicate an astute sensitivity to and connection with this great 

work of theater.  Social actors have shaped their aesthetic experience to specify and 

communicate the circumstances, perpetrators and victims of their trauma to themselves and to a 

wider audience; they have turned theater performance into social performance of trauma.  

Indeed, I argue that it may be through be

auty, through aesthetics and art works, that social actors 

m

ake a claims to trauma which will not be not be judged based on factual accuracy but on the 

ptness of the expression of meaning.   
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

100

 
 
 
 
 
Refere
 
Alexander, Jeffrey C. 2004. “Toward a Theory of Cultural Trauma” Pp.1-30 in Cultural Trauma
and Collective Identity.  Ed. Jeffrey C. Alexander, Ron Eyerman, Bernhard Giesen, Neil 
J. Smelser and Piotr Sztompka. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press 

nces  

 

 
------. 2006. “Cultural Pragmatics: Social Performance Between Ritual and Strategy,” Pp.29-9

0 
in Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual. Ed. Jeffrey C. 
Alexand

er, Bernhard Giesen and Jason L. Mast. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   

 
Alexander, Jeffrey C, Ron Eyerman, Bernhard Giesen, Neil J. Smelser, and Piotr Sztompka. 

2004.  Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity.  Berkeley, CA: University of Californi
Press.   

a 

 
Alexander, Jeffrey C, Bernhard Giesen, and Jason L. Mast, eds.  2006. Social P

erformance: 
Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.   

air, Deirdre. 1978. Samuel Beckett.  New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  

eckett, Samuel.  1954. Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two Acts.  New York: Grove 

Press.  

 
Bradby, David.  2001.  Beckett: Waiting for Godot.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Pre
 
E
 
------. 1995. “Notes on Trauma and Community” Pp.183-199 in Trauma: Explorations in 

rikson, Kai T. 1976. Everything in Its Path. New York: Simon and Schuster Paperbacks.  

Memory ed. Cathy Caruth. Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University Press.  

ss.   

 
B
 
B

 
M

 

 

 
Esslin, 

 
Eyerma

Martin. 1980 [1961] The Theatre of the Absurd, 3rd Edition. Middlesex, E
Books Ltd.  

ngland: Penguin 

n, Ron and Lisa McCormick, eds.  2006.  Myth, Meaning, and Performance: Toward a 
New Cultural Sociology of the Arts.  Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers. 

ast, Jason. 2006. “The Cultural Pragmatics of Event-ness: the Clinton/ Lewinsky Affair,” Pp. 
115- 145 in Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual. Ed. 
Jeffrey C. Alexander, Bernhard Giesen and Jason L. Mast. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.  .   

101

Rauer, Valentin. 2006. “Symbols in Action: Willy Brandt’s Kneefall at the Warsaw Memorial,” 
Pp. 257-282 in Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual. 
r, Bernhard Giesen and Jason L. Mast. Cambridge: Cambridge 
Ed. Jeffrey C. Alexande
University Press.   

rank. 1988. “Stage View: Cutting to the Heart of the Way We Live Now.” The New York 
Times, December 25.   

 
Rich, F

 
Schjeld

ahl, Peter. 1998. “Notes on Beauty,” Pp. 53-59 in Uncontrollable Beauty: T
Aesthetics. Ed. Bill Beckley and David Shapiro. New York: 
Allworth Press.  

oward a New 

 
Schneider, Alan. 1967. “Waiting for Beckett: A Personal Chronicle” in Casebook on Wai

ting for 

Godot: The Impact of Beckett’s Modern Classic: Reviews, Reflections and 
Interpretations. Ed. Ruby Cohn. New York: Grove Press.   

, Susan. 1994. “Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo.”  Performing Arts Journal 16

 
Sontag
 
Smelser, Neil. 2004. “Psychological Trauma and Cultural Trauma” in Cultural Trauma and
ernhard Giesen, Neil J. 

Collective Identity.  Ed. Jeffrey Alexander, Ron Eyerman, B
Smelser and Piotr Sztompka. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press 

: 2.  

 

 
T

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

oole, David.  1998.  Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo: Theological Reflections on Nihilism, 

Tragedy, and Apocalypse.  Boulder, CO: Westview Press.   

102

Yale University 

Center for Cultural Sociology 

 
 

Trauma Workshop 
June 15-16, 2009 

Athens 

The drama of the Greek civil war trauma 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Nicolas Demertzis 

ndemert@media.uoa.gr

 

 
 
semi-final draft

 

103

 
Preface 
 
Child of a working class family, I was born in late 1950s. Less than a year before my birth, my 
family had to move to Athens, the capital of Greece, where ever since 1950 dozens of thousands 
of inner immigrants have been moving in. Abandoning their home villages for a better life, all 
these  people  had  to  sort  out  the  new  urban  setting  with  limited  material  resources  and  social 
capital. So did my family; they had to adjust themselves into an unfamiliar social environment 
whose promise for upward mobility required much emotional energy and human cost. During my 
childhood I was occasionally witnessing quarrels between my parents and my ten years eldest 
brother over family issues mainly related to the coping with the harsh conditions of our everyday 
life.  What  was  striking  me,  or  what  I  currently  think  it  was  striking  me,  in  those  quarrels, 
particularly  whenever  carrier  and  life  chances  were  involved,  was  my  brother  addressing 
fervently  my  father  using  the  biblical  saying  the  sins  of  the  fathers  visit  upon  their  children. 
Upon  this  utterance  I  remember  my  farther  remaining  speechless,  with  his  facial  expression 
revealing embarrassment and a hidden desperation and then suddenly every discussion was over. 
For  many  years  I  was  at  odds  with  these  repeated  episodes  because  I  couldn’t  understand  or 
imagine what the sins of my beloved father might be, and how was it ever possible for that hard 
working and honest man to commit any sin at all. Insinuations and silence on this didn’t help 
much  until  my  adolescence  where  I  started  to  realize  the  meaning  of  the  words  ‘occupation’, 
‘resistance’, ‘resistance fighter’, and ‘exile’ which were mentioned by both my parents rarely in 
the house. As soon as I realized that the meaning of those words was somehow about my father, I 
came  to  feel  that  there  was  actually  no  puzzle  of  a  wrongdoing,  no  sin  committed.  On  the 
contrary, although he was a resistance fighter he was sent to a detention camp shortly after the 
liberation  from  the  Axis.  While  I  was  growing  up,  through  my  parental  identifications  and 
despite  the  fact  that  my  father  was  hardly  speaking  about  his  past  political  doings  and  about 
politics in general, I found it unjust; in time, around this sense of injustice I discovered myself to 
almost naturally belonging to the community of the Greek Left, whatever the vagueness of the 
word might be. Nonetheless, the embarrassment at his face and the silence related to that biblical 
saying, which sounded like a verdict, were a bit of an unsettled reminder in my mind, a bit of a 
mystery.  

At his 60s, when I was already a young man, he was ready to become somewhat more 
talkative about his experiences during the 1940s. Among others, I recall two things: first, he was 
emphatically  saying  that  he  ‘did  no  harm  to  anyone’  while  in  the  resistance;  second,  he  was 
describing  the  civil  war  as  a  big  mistake  and  a  drama.  Then  it  didn’t  escape  my  notice  that 
although  he  did  not  take  part  in  the  civil  war  in  any  conceivable  way  he  was  sharing  the 
responsibility for this ‘big mistake’. He was feeling guilty and humiliated and therefore he kept 
silent most of the time. Though he committed no wrongdoing he was feeling guilty because he 
identified himself with the defeated Left as a whole, as a declined imaginary community. The 
mystery was almost solved. 

My father’s state of mind reflected the mentality of an entire generation; the generation of 
the civil war whose experiences and memories were so much complicated, emotionally charged, 
and  negatively  marked  that  were  condemned  into  silence,  embarrassment  and  fear.  Those 
experiences and memories spill over the next generation precisely because the Greek civil war 
was not just a personal drama for all those who took active part in it but a cultural trauma which 
was meant to affect the entire social body and the body polity for several decades. In this paper I 

 

104

 

attempt to substantiate this claim by placing the war in its socio-historical and cultural setting. 
This  is  done  by  using  and  interpreting  evidence  from  past  historical,  sociological  and 
ethnographic  research,  on  the  one  hand,  and  original  qualitative  interviews  conducted  for  the 
purpose of this paper, on the other105.        

       
Historical context 
 
The Greek civil war was Europe’s bloodiest military conflict between 1945 and the collapse of 
Yugoslavia in 1992-5; besides, as a defining moment of the Cold War106, it has been the most 
prolonged and traumatic experience of Greece since its establishment as a nation-state in 1830’s. 
As every other civil war, it sprang out of a host of socio-historical and political cultural roots. 
Most  of  them  are  located  in  the  confrontations  of  the  interwar  period,  the  most  important  of 
which are (1) the national schism between republicans and royalists, (2) the newcomers who fled 
the  lands  of  Asia  Minor  vs  autochthones,  and  (3)  the  Metaxas’  dictatorship  (1936)  and  the 
anticommunist  legislation.  To  be  sure,  these  divisions  were  much  less  intense  than  the 
intersecting cleavages which fueled the Spanish civil war (regional/ethnic differences, Catholics 
versus anticlerical groups, class conflicts). What is more, the Finnish civil war had a much more 
solid class basis thanks to the strong organizational unity of the workers’ movement in Finland 
so  that  it  can  be  seen  as  perhaps  Europe's  most  clear-cut  class  war  in  the  twentieth  century 
(Alapuro 2002). 
The national schism (Ethnicos Dichasmos), started with the different attitude of the King 
 
Constantine  and  the  Prime  minister  Eleftherios  Venizelos  towards  the  powers  of  the  Entente 
(Britain,  France  and  Russia).  The  King  insisted  on  neutrality  whereas  Venizelos  opted  for 
alliance with the Entente at the outbreak of the First World War. The real cause, however, lied in 
the unbridgeable differences of the two men with regards to political preferences. The politics of 
the King and of his supporters were deeply conservative whereas the politics of Venizelos were 
liberal  and  reformist.  After  internal  political  turmoil  between  royalists  and  republicans  and 
pressure from Entente, the King without abdicating went into exile (1917) but returned to the 
throne in 1920 after the defeat of Venizelos in the national elections of a country exhausted after 
eight years of wars.  
 
As a result of the 1919 peace treaty, in 1921 the Greek Army, under the command of 
Constantine himself, undertook a major expedition in Asia Minor which, however, was ill-fated.  
In August 1922 the Turkish Army under Mustafa Kemal in a counter-offensive forced the Greek 
troops out of Asia Minor altogether and demolished Smyrna which was virtually a city of Greek 
diaspora. About 1,500,000 refugees fled to Greece from Asia Minor. This “catastrophe” resulted 
into  the  abdication  of  the  King,  put  an  end  to  Greek  irredentism  and  gave  rise  to  the  strain 
between refugee newcomers and autochthones. The frail economy of the country burdened by 
foreign indebtedness and the huge cost of waging wars for a whole decade was at pains to sustain 
the refugees most of which faced social hardship, discrimination and humiliations of all kinds.   
                                                 
105  Thanks  to  my  MA  student  Katerina  Koronaki  for  her  valuable  contribution  in  this.  We  contacted  eleven 
informants; eight of them are left minded, and three right minded. All of then took part in the civil war.    
106 Even more bloody, the Spanish civil war (1936- 1939) was the terrain of the confrontation between Fascism and 
anti-fascist forces. The defeat of the Left in that war heralded the domination of the Axis for almost a decade. The 
defeat of the Greek Left announced the sheer political and diplomatic domination of the USA in the country for 
three decades or so.   

 

105

 
In the census of 1928 the Greek population had risen to 6,204,674 out of 5,016,589 in 
1920. The large influx of the refugees set in motion a significant left-wing labor movement in the 
urban centers and an acute problem of agrarian reform in the countryside. Along with this there 
was  a  widespread  anti-royalist  feeling  which  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  the  First  Greek 
Republic  (1924-1936).  Yet,  due  to  the  interwar  economic  depression  and  the  persisting 
confrontation  between  royalists  and  republicans  parliamentary  democracy  was  suspended  in 
1936  by  the  dictatorship  of  the  dedicated  royalist  General  Ioannis  Metaxas.  The  new  regime, 
supported if not directed by the King himself, was successful enough in destroying the Left by 
implementing anticommunist legislation and taking such harsh measures as exile, imprisonment 
and repressive surveillance.   

To  the  triple  (German-Italian-Bulgarian) Axis  occupation  of  the  country,  1941-1944,  a 
noticeable grass roots resistance was enacted; quite soon though it provided an opportunity for 
the leftist – mainly communist- political forces to organize themselves in a massive scale for the 
first  time,  inspired  by  the  anti-imperialistic  strategy  of  the  Third  International.  This  was  in 
tandem with a spirit of resistance and the general leftward shift spread throughout the occupied 
Europe.  In  Greece  and  Yugoslavia  the  resistance  developed  into  a  massive  emancipatory 
movement with internal discrepancies as well as impressive results against the occupation forces. 
It  has  to  be  noted,  though,  that  one  should  not  overdo  with  the  resistance  by  any  sort  of 
idealization  while  analyzing  the  Greek  or  any  other  European  country  in  the  1940s.  In  many 
countries  a  legend  of  an  all-embracing  ‘national’  resistance  was  constructed  and  forwarded 
immediately after the end of the war as a point of collective admiration which suppressed either 
the  toleration  to  the  occupation  forces  by  many  social  strata  or  the  dealings  and  deeds  of 
collaborators during and after the war.      

 The Axis occupation in Greece led to a breakdown of state and society. It has been well 
documented that during the occupation the victims of the famine in winter 1941-2, caused by the 
blockade  of  the  Greek  ports  by  the  British  navy,  the  plunder  of  the  natural  resources  by  the 
occupation  forces  due  to  the  lack  of  any  serious  system  of  their  supplying,  and  the  felonious 
mistakes of the public administration agencies responsible for the distribution of food, were in 
total  more  than  the  victims  of  the  bombings,  the  guerilla  war  and  the  retaliation  of  the  Axis 
troops107. Though exact numbers cannot be defined, it is estimated that the victims of the famine 
are almost 100.000 (Fleischer 1986).  

Under  these  circumstances,  the  prewar  ruling  elites  were  almost  totally  discredited  in 
view of their reluctance to undertake any serious resistance initiatives and their massive retreat to 
the Middle East. In this political vacuum, ordinary people took first efforts to keep themselves 
                                                 
107 Even nowadays the expression “occupation syndrome” refers to precautious and proactive consuming behavior 
based on the assumption that there might be no food in the near future. No doubt, the famine  marked collective 
memory in a decisive way. It can be argued that up to a certain point the roots and causes of the civil war stem not 
so much from the above mentioned cleavages but from the dissolution of the Greek society during the Occupation 
period and the antagonisms, animosities and hostilities it gave rise to: collaborators, black marketeers and so on. To 
be sure however, one should not exaggerate with the long last destructive consequences of the occupation as these 
were  used  in  the  construction  of  the  post  war  victimization  of  the  nations  involved.  After  the  war,  almost  each 
country constructed a powerful myth about the unprecedented destructions it suffered by the enemy, suppressing 
thus from the public memory the thorns of collaboration, the toleration of the Jewish genocide and ethnic cleansings 
executed either by the Axis forces or the resistance, as well as alignment with the occupation forces. On top of this, 
one  should  not  to  fail  to  underscore  the  incredible  corruption  with  which  the  Marshal  plan  was  implemented  in 
Greece so that huge amounts of money to end up in private pockets, frequently in those of collaborators, fanatic 
anticommunists and the power elite. For these groups the blaming of the Axis for the post war misery of the country 
was an easy bypassing to get away with their own responsibilities (Fleischer 2008: 135 etc).                                                                     

 

106

alive and to secure access to food; at a later stage a more organized pro-Allied resistance began 
mainly by communists. Acts of resistance and sabotage became frequent from the winter of 1941 
by  the  Ethniko  Apeleftherotiko  Metopo  (EAM:  National  Liberation  Front),  the  major 
organization of the left and the communists (Tsoukalas 1969: chapter 4; Clogg 1979). EAM was 
by far the largest and more powerful organization which in 1942 formed its own military branch, 
the  Ethnikos  Laikos  Apeleftherotikos  Stratos  (ELAS:  Greek  People’s  Liberation  Army) 
pronounced as “Ellas”, the name of the country itself. To be sure, the great majority of the people 
were not communists but very sympathetic to EAM and very many, including lots of women, 
jointed  it not only out of defiance against the German, Italian and Bulgarian occupation but also 
as an act of participation in social life from which have always felt excluded. According to Clogg 
(1979:150), «by the end of the occupation the membership of EAM has been variously estimated 
at between a million and two million». 

Other  resistance  organizations  such  as  the  Ethnikos  Dimokratikos  Ellinikos  Syndesmos 
(EDES:  National  Republican  Greek  League),  initially  of  liberal  democratic  tendencies,  soon 
developed an anticommunist orientation. Consequently, the resistance did not manage from the 
beginning to act in unison, apart from one or two major acts of sabotage in collaboration with 
British intelligence. Already in 1943 deadly battles and bloody skirmishes were taking place in 
the countryside and the Athens area between EAM/ELAS and various non-leftist organizations 
heralding thus the civil war which was to follow.  

In  March  5,  1946  Churchill  announced  his  notorious  “iron  curtain”  statement  and  in 
March 1947 the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan were launched. These dates tally with 
two crucial incidents of the Greek civil war: March 30, 1946 is regarded to be the conventional 
date  for  the  launching  of  the  conflict;  in  September  1947,  after  consulting  USSR,  the  Greek 
Communist  Party  decided  to  lead  the  war  to  its  climax  [the  limnes  (lakes)  plan].  These 
correlations indicate the inexorable engagement of the Greek civil war with the setting out of the 
Cold war. As a matter of fact, the civil war in Greece was the first paradigmatic case where the 
USA, on the one hand, invoked the domino theory, and tested their credibility as the world leader 
against  communism,  on  the  other.  From  their  part,  Stalin  and  Tito  handled  the  Greek  case 
according to their mutual relations and the cross pressures exerted on them in the UN. For the 
USA, the confrontation with the Greek Communists (no political compromise and smash of the 
enemy)  served  as  a  model  in  their  later  entanglement  in  Guatemala,  Lebanon,  Cuba,  Saint 
Dominican and Vietnam (Kolko 1994: 373-395, Coufoudakis 1981, Iatrides 2002). 

It has to be stated emphatically that, seen in a historical perspective and from the vantage 
point of the present, the Greek civil war was a multifaceted phenomenon. First of all, it was a 
total  war  which  involved  armed  and  civilians,  orthodox  and  unorthodox  styles  of  military 
conflict.  Second,  with  some  sound  exemptions,  it  was  carried  out  almost  exclusively  in  the 
countryside108.  Third,  it  was  marked  by  great  local  particularities  and  exigencies.  These  have 
been recognized quite recently when certain scholars used alternative methodological tools in the 
study of the civil war: oral history, local memories and personal archives, discourse analysis and 
                                                 
108  The  Left  in  the  cities  survived  the  civil  war  with  much  less  damage  compared  with  the  rural  areas,  and  that 
explains  why  it  scored  quite  high  in  the  1950s’  general  elections.  In  the  1958  election,  particularly,  the    Eniea 
Demokratiki Aristera (United Democratic Left) received 24,4% of the vote and became the major opposition party. 
Unlike the Spanish case, while the civil war was waged in Greece the regime remained democratic. Paradoxically or 
not,  even  when  executions  were  performed  in  late  ‘40s  and  early  ‘50s,  the  country  was  run  by  a  center-right 
government.  That  government  and  those  to  come  over  the  next  two  decades  until  the  1967  coup  de  etat  were 
patronized by the USA embassy and acted according to double legal standards: an emergency legislation against the 
Left and a ‘normal’ rule of law for the rest, alleged to be nationally minded.     

 

107

so  on  (Marantzides  2002;  Kalyvas  2000,  2002,  2003;  Sakkas  2000).  Often,  events  in  local 
context diverted from the great politics of the decision-taking headquarters and as a consequence 
the cleavages of the central political scene had little or even no impact on the local politics where 
personal  and  kinship  relations  and  hostilities  were  of  primary  importance.  It  has  been 
documented that, as the micro-foundation of the macro-structure of the civil war is more crucial 
than  it  was  thought  one  or  two  decades  ago,  mediating  mechanisms  and  procedures  such  as 
ethnic  origins,  religious  attachments,  local  networking,  family  ties,  local  traditions,  local 
violence, interpersonal relations etc play an important role for the recruitment to this or the other 
side  of  the  conflict,  the  persistence  of  the  commitment,  and  the  selective  incentives  in 
participating or abstaining from the war (Margarites 1989: 507-9; Mylonas 2003). 
 
The Greek civil war as a research topic. A rich but tormented bibliography  
 
It has not been always easy to do research and make publications on the Greek civil war; for 
several decades it was a taboo of public life and scholars were reluctant to deal with it due to non 
accessible archives until early 1980s and suspicious or even hostile political climate. Systematic 
scholarly  work  started  after  the  political  changeover  of  1974  (the  collapse  of  the  seven  years 
military dictatorship), but took off in early 1990s by historians, social anthropologists, political 
scientists, sociologists and social psychologists. Gradually, the number of local and international 
conferences on the civil war has been growing up indicating thus that it is not a taboo any more 
(Dordanas & Michaelidis 2007). Ever since 1984, seventeen conferences have been organized 
mainly  in  Greece  as  well  as  abroad  with  the  Network  for  the  Study  of  the  Civil  Wars 
(http://www.elia.org.gr/civil_war_greek/index.htm),  founded  in  2000,  to  be  one  of  the  major 
actors in this sort of academic activity.  Roughly speaking, the rationale of all this academic and 
scholarly activity has been the redirection of attention from the question “Whose fault was it?” 
towards  the  question  “How  did  the  civil  war  take  place?”  (Marantzidis  &  Antoniou  2004; 
Mazower 2000: 8). 

 Yet, the situation is somewhat more complicated; scholars not only dispute over definite 
aspects of the civil war but over the ways it should be studied. To my opinion, these disputes are 
indexical  of  the  pertinently  discordant  effects  of  the  civil  war  in  many  social  milieus,  the 
academics and the intelligentsia included. But let me be more explicit.  

a) Respecting the duration of the civil war, for many years and as indicated above, the 
mainstream position was March 30, 1946 to August 29, 1949. Yet, this has been disputed lately 
and a ‘When it started vs When it ended’ controversy is taking place among political sociologists 
and historians in Greece. Among others, the criterion is what makes an armed conflict within a 
state  into  a  civil  war.  This  is  a  controversy  that  draws  on  from  both  the  literature  of  the 
comparative  studies  of  civil  wars  (Fearon  &  Laitin  2003,  Sambanis  2002)  and  the  retroactive 
stakes of the Greek political scene. For some, it is more appropriate to speak of civil military 
conflicts  during  the  occupation  period  when  one  refers  to  the  armed  confrontations  between 
ELAS and EDES in 1943, rather than of civil war. For them, a civil war presupposes a durable 
and large scale of military mobilization which actually occurred in the 1946-1949 period. In their 
point  of  view,  the  1944  December  events  (Dekemviana)  where  a  short  but  dreadful  struggle 
between ELAS, the British troops and the newly formed  Greek gendarmerie, staffed mainly by 
collaborators,  sparked  three  months  after  the  liberation,  cannot  be  seen  either  as  a  civil  war 
(Margarites 1989).  

 

108

On the other hand, there are scholars109, whose positions I tend to endorse, arguing that 
conflicts between Greeks during the resistance period can be regarded as civil war irrespective of 
their sporadic or intermittent nature, provided that contradictory and mutually exclusive socio-
political projects lay behind them. A similar situation one can observe nowadays in Iraq where 
civil and inter-ethnic conflicts coexist with resistance to the American and British troops.  

Another similar issue raised in the debate is whether the 1945-1946 right-wing violence 
which sprung after the Varkiza Agreement against the defeated followers of EAM/ELAS signals 
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  (Mazower  2000:  6-7,  31-2).  Among  others,  according  to  that 
agreement, signed in February 1945 as a result of the end of Dekemvriana, the guerilla units had 
to  withdraw  and  surrender  their  arms.  Subsequently,  the  offenses  committed  during  the 
Dekemvriana were pardoned except ‘common-law crimes against life and property which were 
not  absolutely  necessary  to  the  achievement  of  the  political  crime  concerned’.  This  clause 
provided  the  excuse  to  ultra-right  and  royalist  bands  for  launching  a  mass-scale  violence  and 
terror  against  members,  followers  or  even  sympathizers  of  EAM/ELAS  (Voglis  2000:  74-5). 
Nowadays, a considerable part of the right-wing historiography accepts the description of these 
events as “white terrorism”, and a minimum of consensus seems to be formed around this. Yet, a 
crucial issue is raised, mainly by left-leaning scholars, as to whether that was a “unilateral civil 
war” – which was to be followed soon by the “bilateral civil war” -,  or it can be seen as the real 
beginning of the civil war, pulling thus its opening date one calendar year backwards, i.e.1945 
(Koulouris 2000: 52-4).         

b) By and large and for many years, the Greek scholars seemed to stay aloof or ignore the 
results of the international research on civil wars, remaining therefore highly Hellenocentric and 
ethnocentric rather than comparative and non-parochial (Mylonas 2003; Marantzidis & Antoniou 
2004). Most interpretations were swept by the left-right cleavage and the imperatives of the Cold 
War. As a result, the ethnic dimensions of the war were overlooked as well; for instance, until 
recently,  the  vicissitudes  of  the  Slavophonic  population  and  the  strategies  of  the  Turkish-
speaking groups during the war were particularly under-researched. Also, the extermination of 
about 100,000 Greek Jews has been hardly researched and analyzed systematically in most of 
scholarly works on the civil war.  

c)  Currently,  a  heated  controversy  between  traditional  historians  who  base  their  work 
chiefly if not exclusively on the study of archives and a respectable group of younger and post-
revisionist scholars who bring in oral history, memory and local studies, and clinical approaches 
is taking place. The thrust of the dispute is about the appropriateness of the oral and local history 
methods and the possible disintegration of the field through topical approaches and piece meal 
studies.  Most  clearly,  the  traditionalist  argument  holds  that  scrutinizing  written  sources  as 
opposed to oral testimonies is the right method to study the civil war to the extend that these 
sources are objective and not self-selected. Yet, the proponents of this argument tend to overlook 
that, very often, written documents are produced and distributed in an equally selective manner. 
In addition, they claim that by focusing on local histories and personal memories, revisionists 
conclude  to  a  fragmentation  of  the  subject  matter,  loose  the  macro-analytical  perspective  and 
contribute  to  the  relativisation  of  historical  reality.  It  should  be  noted  that  in  this  controversy 
both left and right-leaning scholars are involved in an intersecting way. 

A clear-cut, though, distinction between left and right-leaning approaches can be found in 
the non academic bibliography on the Greek civil war.  On the whole, it consists of propaganda 
                                                 
109 As early as 1969, Andreas Papandreou (1969) explicitly stated that the Greek civil war started at October 1943 
when ELAS troops attacked EDES. 

 

109

material, veterans’ memoirs, auto-biographies, biographies, diaries, illustrated texts, congresses 
and  conventions  minutes  and  the  like  (Koulouris  2000).  Since  the  non-academic  writings  are 
closely related to the waving of political climate, researchers have distinguished two periods in 
the production of this sort of writings:  (a) 1945 - 1974 where two out of three books published 
were anti-left; (b) 1974 – 2000s where four out of five books were left-minded (Marantzidis & 
Antoniou  2003,  2004).  It  is  note  worthy  that  almost  half  of  the  right-wing  production  was 
published  within  the  first  decade  after  the  end  of  WWII,  whereas  most  of  the  left-wing 
production appeared in the 1980s. On the one hand, this reflects the urge of the victorious right-
wing  hegemonic  bloc  to  forward  its  own  narration  as  soon  as  the  war  was  over;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  massive  publication  of  memoirs  and  auto-biographies  after  the  1974  political 
changeover  (the  so-called  Metapolitefsi)  and  especially  after  1982,  when  the  Socialist 
government recognized the national resistance, can be seen as a after-effect of the much more 
broader ‘explosion of collective memory’ and the rise of ‘public history’ which has been taking 
place since 1989 all around the globe (Voglis 2008; Panagiotopoulos 1997).  In effect, there are 
two different perceptions of the Greek Civil War image, the post-war Civil War and the post-
dictatorship Civil War perception.   

To sum up, the bibliography for the Greek civil war is quite rich as it consists of a large 
number of books and writings110. Naturally, though, it is divided and tormented by controversial 
issues, overt and covert political antagonisms, and unsettled dilemmas.   

 
 
Conceptual setting: The civil war as cultural-social trauma 

   

 

The notion of “cultural- social trauma” has been forwarded systematically as a distinct cultural 
sociological concept referring to institutional changes, to the constitution of collective memory 
and  to  forms  of  collective  action.  Formulated  alongside  the  tenets  of  a  weak  social 
constructionism, cultural-social trauma is meant to be “a memory accepted and publicly given 
credence by a relevant membership group and evoking an event or situation, which is (a) laden 
with  negative  affect,  (b)  represented  as  indelible,  and  (c)  regarded  as  threatening  a  society’s 
existence or violating one or more of its fundamental cultural presuppositions” (Smelser, 2004: 
44). According to Alexander (2004: 1) cultural trauma occurs when members of a collectivity 
feel  that  they  have  suffered  a  horrendous  event  that  leaves  indelible  marks  upon  their  group 
consciousness,  marking  their  memories  for  ever  and  changing  their  future  identity  in 
fundamental and irrevocable ways. From an intergenerational point of view, a cultural trauma is 
a  “chosen  trauma”  in  the  way  Vamik  Volkan  (2005)  puts  it;  i.e.  a  large  group's  unconscious 
“choice” to add to its own identity a past generation's mental representation of a shared event that 
has caused a large group to face drastic losses, feel helpless and victimized by another group, and 
share a humiliating injury. Apparently, the fundamental elements of the cultural trauma theory 
are: memory, emotion, and identity. In this respect, cultural sociology joins hands with the sub-
fields of memory, trauma and disaster studies. It is a complex area of theory and research which 
                                                 
110 It is indicative that between 1945 and 1999 a sum total of 576 books were published in Greek (Koulouris 2000). 
 

 

110

straddles the micro and the macro111, on the one hand, and the long and short duration of the 
historical time, on the other.     
 
The  Greek  civil  war  is  an  exemplary  case  of  cultural-social  trauma  of  considerable 
duration and significance. As already mentioned, it is the bloodiest conflict Europe ever faced 
between 1945 and 1990. To be sure however, since there is no agreement as to when the civil 
war starts, and given the collapse of the official agencies of public administration responsible for 
social statistics during the occupation period and shortly after the liberation, there is no precise 
measurement of casualties. According to official estimations, the number of dead were 40.000 
whereas  according  to  unofficial  estimations  their  number  gets  as  high  as  158.000  (Tsoukalas 
1969: 89). Up to 100.000 members of DSE (Dimokratikos Stratos Ellados: Democratic Army of 
Greece),  the  successor  of  ELAS,  crossed  the  northern  borders  and  migrated  in  communist 
countries for several decades. Those of Slavic ethnic origin are not allowed to return and settle 
back even today. Needless to say that material disaster of all kinds was much larger. On top of 
these one has to add the unprecedented hardship the country faced from the moment it entered 
the World War II until the eve of the liberation. From 1940 to 1944 almost 8 per cent of the 
entire population was killed and 34 per cent of the national treasure was devastated (Tsoukalas 
1969: 69). According to McVeagh, the Ambassador of the USA in Athens, in early 1946  the two 
thirds of Greece’s population were fed with only 1.700 calories per day (in comparison to the 
2.850  calories  of  the  British);  almost  30%  of  the  population  suffered  by  malaria  while  the 
percentage of tuberculosis was fifteen times higher than in Britain (Richter 1997: 434). Just after 
the end of the civil war in 1949 almost 10 per cent of the population (i.e.700.000 people) were 
homeless refugees waiting to re-inhabit their wrecked villages. In effect, the WWII and the civil 
war devastated almost entirely the Greek economy and really ravaged Greek society.   
 
 All  these  had  a  profound  impact  on  the  way  people  got  accustomed  with  all  sorts  of 
violence (Voglis 2002); we could argue that, on the one hand, the civil war rested on a culture of 
violence  inherited  from  the  occupation  period  (collective  retaliations,  mass  executions, 
deportation of local population -especially in the region of Eastern Macedonia occupied by the 
Bulgarians-, burning of villages, public exposure of the corps), which was amplified by black as 
well as by red terror,  on the other (Kalyvas 2002). Cruelties and atrocities from both sides and 
thousands of victims marked collective memories, hammered personal political identities and life 
projects, and changed the social fabric in a far reaching way.  

As a total social event, therefore, the Greek civil war has been experienced as a cultural-
social  trauma  because  it  affected  collective  memories,  group  consciousness,  and  the 
organizational  principles  of  the  Greek  society,  re-directing  its  orientation  for  more  than  three 
decades. It was not only caused by two almost mutually exclusive worlds; it created two opposed 
worlds  as  well.    For  25  years  the  most  overwhelming  consequence  of  the  civil  war  was  the 
cleavage  between  the  so  called  national  mindful  (ethnikofrones)  and  the  defeated  Left.  This 
cleavage permeated not only the political realm but every single social, economic and cultural 
arena.  It  intersected  with  the  above  mentioned  mid-war  cleavage  between  royalists  and 
republicans; thus the mid-war animosities were reinterpreted as much as the refugees from Asia 
Minor jointed EAM massively. In late 1960s, at a time where parliamentary democracy seemed 
to get consolidated and the post-civil war regime to loose ties, the traumatic cleavage of the civil 
war was enhanced and over-determined by the trauma of the seven years military dictatorship 
                                                 
111 As I have claimed elsewhere (Demertzis 2009), the affiliations between the psychoanalytic account of trauma 
and the notion of cultural-social trauma are more than it is usually admitted (Alexander 2004; 2003: 85-107).  
 

 

111

(1967-74). The coup d’etat blocked every outlet for the democratic incorporation of the ‘non-
nationally  minded’  in  the  political  system;  this  would  have  normally  occurred  if  the  general 
elections scheduled for May 1967 took place. As I have written elsewhere (Demertzis 2006), fear 
and insecurity returned to the left-leaning strata of the population who had staffed and socially 
supported  EAM,  EDA  (Eniaia  Dimokratiki  Aristera:  United  Democratic  Left)  and  EK  (Enosi 
Kentrou:  Union  of  the  Center),  the  parties  which    challenged  the  dominance  of  ERE  (Ethniki 
Rizospastiki  Enosis:  National  Radical  Union),  the  governing  right-wing  party.  On  top  of  the 
cultural trauma of the civil war, there now came the trauma of the imposition of dictatorship and 
the humiliation of the defeated was not lifted but, on the contrary, accentuated.  

For  all  its  horrendous  impact,  it  is  my  conviction  that  the  Greek  civil  war  was  not  an 
inevitable historical event; things could have happen otherwise and follow another direction. It is 
indicative that during the war the KKE (Kommounistiko Komma Ellados: Communist Party of 
Greece)  forwarded  twenty  one  different  plans  for  peace,  whereas  the  British  and  the  Greek 
government  offered  more  than  six  peace  initiatives.  Although  those  proposals  were  part  and 
parcel of the pull and push power game at the military, political and international arenas, one can 
retroactively  say  that  the  actors  themselves  had  some  freedom  and  the  discretion  to  choose 
another course (Sfikas 2002). Had all parties involved opted for a compromise as early as 1947 
or even 1948, the likelihood is that the conflict would not produce deep going consequences in 
the Greek political culture.  

Though  its  consequences  came  formally  at  an  end  in  1974,  when  democracy  was 
restored, the communist party- clashed in the meantime-, was legalized, and all civil rights and 
liberties were reinstated, the social psychological effects of the civil war are still pertinent, albeit 
not to the same extend as ten or twenty years ago. It may be true that nowadays scholars and 
students approach the civil war in a more distanced way, but it is equally true that it hibernates in 
collective  moods,  political  and  national  stereotypes,  and  social  memory(ies).  This  can  be 
discerned in the current elite and mass attitude towards the (Former Yugoslavian) Republic of 
Macedonia  a  considerable  part  of  whose  inhabitants  consists  of  DSE  fighters  of  Macedonian 
ethnic origin.  

 
 
 

The discursive-symbolic construction and reconstruction of the civil war. 
 
We  know  that  an  event,  as  destructive  as  it  may  be,  will  become  or  produce  cultural-social 
trauma  when  connected  to  the  structure  and  logic  of  social  action.  A  cultural-social  trauma 
involves  the  realization  (with  both  meanings  of  the  word,  that  is  as  becoming  conscious  of 
something and as something becoming real) of a common plight. It has to be defined collectively 
as  such  in  order  to  influence  the  systems  of  reference  of  an  entire  society  or,  at  least,  of  a 
significant  part  of  it  and  change  established  roles,  rules,  habituses,  and  narratives.  In  other 
words,  it  has  to  function  as  a  total  social  event  and  not  just  be  the  aggregate  of  numerous 
individual experiences. A dislocating traumatogenic event, for example, a civil war, does not in 
itself constitute a “trauma”. In order to become “trauma”, it has to undergo a process of social 
signification;  namely,  it  has  to  be  signified  and  become  socially  accepted  and  constructed  as 
“trauma”. In what follows I shall attempt to outline the regime of signification of the Greek civil 
war so as to mark out some distinguishing characteristics as well as commonalities with other 
civil wars.  

 

112

 
The semantic designation of the war 
 
 If one wants to compare the Greek case with other civil wars in an effort to demonstrate its own 
particularities, one should point out the semantic designation of this war in its proper political 
cultural setting. Hitherto I have been referring to the Greek civil war making use of the English 
words ‘civil war’. Yet; one should bear in mind that in Greek there is no semantic equivalent to 
civil war; in fact, the Greek word which goes for civil war is emphylios polemos (internecine 
war, war within the same race). Civil war is premised on the notion of civil society and civil 
sphere; it presupposes individualized citizens who are organized along clashing collective goals 
and/or  interests  and  contest  over  the  definition  of  a  society’s  historicity,  to  use  Touraine’s 
terminology.  On  the  contrary,  the  Greek  universe  of  political  discourse  cannot  sustain 
linguistically  the  idea  of  inner-state  war qua  civil  war  precisely  because  it  has  been  endowed 
with a variety of pre and anti-modern social significations. This is due to the traditionally weak 
civil society; i.e., the making of the Greek state and polity in the nineteenth century, including 
the parliamentary sub-system, took place principally in a non or, to be more accurate, an quasi-
capitalist socio-economic environment (Mouzelis 1986, Charalambis & Demertzis 1993). As a 
consequence, Greek economic capital at large has been commercial rather than productive, and 
the socio-economic development has been thoroughly carried out by the state and not by a robust 
capitalist market. This model has made for the prominence of loose party structures, it has been 
conducive  to  clientelistic  electoral  politics  and  it  contributed  to  an  atrophic  civil  society 
(Demertzis 1997). More generally, in the absence of a deep rooted bourgeois culture, for more 
than  a  century,  Greek  society  developed  alongside  the  tenets  of  cultural  nationalism  and 
traditionalism  rather  than  on  political  and  socio-economic  modernity,  resembling  thus  what 
Riggs (1964) defines as “prismatic society”, i.e. a society with minimal differentiation and highly 
mixed structural functions. In other words, despite the modernization processes put forward since 
the last quarter of the 19th century, and the emergence of a still born class politics and interest 
intermediation in the inter-war period, the hegemonic political cultural setting within which the 
civil war took place was of a Gemeinschaft rather than of a Gesselschaft nature.  

As a strong civil sphere was missing and the communal habitus prevailed it follows naturally 
that the armed conflict between Greeks in mid 1940s was designated as internecine rather than as 
civil war proper. It was meant as a conflict within the same national family, between men and 
women of the same blood, namely between brothers rather than between opposing life projects 
and mutually exclusive societal interests within civil society. For this very same reason in the 
Greek language “public opinion” is translated as “common opinion” (koini gnome), as an opinion 
shared by everyone and not as an opinion formed publicly.  
As in other Balkan as well as eastern European countries, the nation-state in Greece, as a 
 
post-traditional mode of domination, is supported by what has been called cultural nationalism, 
i.e. an ideological discourse according to which the nation is far from being a human association 
premised  on  modernity’s  civic  liberties,  but  a  particularistic  ethno-cultural  community  of 
language,  religion,  tradition,  race,  habits,  romanticized  historical  memories  and  so  on  (Kohn 
1961: 329-30, 457; Sugar 1969: 19-20, 34-5; Mann 1992: 137-8; Demertzis 1996: 227-44). At a 
macro-level, this ethno-nationalist discourse provided an ultimate legitimacy of the societal order 
as  long  as  it  fosters  a  collective  self-representation  of  Greek  society  as  a  horizontal  and 
communal brotherhood.  

 

113

No wonder, therefore, that although in 1943-44 and 1945-46 EAM as well as the anti-EAM 
bloc were warning about the large scale imminent civil war (emphylios), during the period of the 
actual  fighting  (1946-1949),  both  sides  were  cautious  enough  not  to  use  the  word  emphylios 
polemos for the description of what they were taking part in. Had they employed such a semantic 
designation,  they  would  discredit  themselves  as  violators  of  the  transcendental  racial/national 
unity. To put it in another way: the constitutive civiclessness of the Greek civil war is explained 
by the moral, if not sacred, character of national community which imperatively precluded the 
actors from defining their doings in current time, as bloody and devastating as they might be, in 
line with the only available codification the universe of the Greek political discourse could offer 
them: as ‘internecine war’. Instead, both sides demonized each other and thus they were creating 
symbolically the proper enemy to kill. As long as it was morally unbearable to take responsibility 
for the waging of an internecine war, each rival struggled symbolically for the de-humanization 
of the other drawing legitimacy from the consensual myth of national-communitarian unity.   

Unable  to  follow  a  binary  discourse  of  civil  society,  the  contenders  adopted  a  moral  and 
nationalistic binary discourse evading thus to identify their conflict as internecine war.  For the 
Right,  on  the  one  hand,  the  1944  December  events  were  assigned  as  rebellion  and  their 
opponents were just rebels against the legal national government. Besides, the 1946-49 conflict 
was  a  war  against  bandits  and  outlaws  (symmoritopolemos),  a  war  against  communist  bandits 
who betrayed their country by pursuing to cut off a part of it and annex it to the Soviet bloc or 
offer it to the Slavs. The latter was premised by the anticipation that the DSE and its government 
(Prosorini Democratiki Kivernisi: Interim Democratic Government) would serve Bulgaria’s geo-
strategic  ambitions,  after  the  Soviet  Union’s  proposal  at  the  Peace  Conference  of  1946  that 
western Thrace, actually a Greek territory, should be conceded to the then socialist Bulgaria. To 
be sure, a couple of years before, as an occupation force, Bulgaria projected the annexation of 
the north east Greek Macedonia and put into practice a systematic plan of de-hellenization of the 
region. On top of that, three years later, at January 1949, the Greek Communist Party decided for 
the autonomy of Macedonia and the self-government of the Macedonian People. Although that 
decision was canceled five months later and proclaimed as an ‘error’, it gave to its opponents a 
perfect opportunity for propaganda and blame attribution.   

For  the  Left,  on  the  other  hand,  the  1946-49  inner-state  conflict  as  well  as  the  December 
events  was  described  principally  as  “people’s  liberation  war”,  “people’s  democratic  struggle”, 
“people’s self-defense”, “armed struggle of DSE”, “armed struggle”, or plainly “struggle”. The 
opponents of the Left were monarchists-fascists and reactionaries who gave up the country to 
British  and  American  troops,  whose  presence  was  interpreted  no  less  than  a  “second 
occupation”. Only after the December events the left-minded press referred sporadically to the 
possibility of an “internecine tearing” caused and led, as it were, by the British.   
Apparently, these semantic designations on both sides were the necessary symbolic arms 
 
which prepared the actors to hate and kill the enemy and to be ready to get killed themselves. Via 
an adversarial meaning-giving process, both sides were defending the nation, albeit in a different 
fashion; namely, the Right was defending the restoration of the national unity whereas the Left 
was concerned for the liberation and the reconstitution of the nation. For their advocates, both 
projects were of outmost significance that awarded legitimacy to violent and brutal actions, and 
moral superiority to each side’s own self-contained political outlook. At the end of the day, the 
paradox is that although everybody knew perfectly that the war they were waging was among 
Greeks no one dared to call it internecine war (Elephantis 2003: 96-7,143).  

 

114

 
Actually the above mentioned semantic designation of the Greek civil war should come 
as  no  surprise;  in  many  other  cases  of  civil  wars  one  can  observe  the  same  terminological 
civiclessness premised on the different dependency path of each country with respect to political 
modernity. To use a few examples, the word in Serbian/Croatian bratocibilački rat which means 
internecine war or war between brothers (armed conflict between Yugoslav peoples during the 
WWII and conflict within national communities later on). The Polish equivalent of the civil war 
is Wojna Domowa which means ‘domestic war’; in the feudal era,  civil war in Japanese was  
(cid:31)(cid:31)  =  Nairan  (internal  unrest)  whereas  in  the  present  era  was(cid:31)(cid:31)  =  Naisen  (internal  fight, 
internal war).  As ‘internal fight’ civil war is understood in the Chinese as well ((cid:31)(cid:31) =        ). In 
Czech there are two terminological versions of the concept:   the colloquial version is občanská 
válka; when it comes to the struggle with the collaborators in the WWII, Građanski rat  is the 
literary translation of ‘civil war’.   Similar but not identical is the terminological designation of 
the  Finnish  civil  war;  until  1970s,  where  the  consensus  politics  had  prevailed  and  the  sharp 
memories  of  the  war  were  alleviated,  civil  war  (kansalaissota)  was  very  much  in  use  by  the 
defeated Social Democrats, and class war (luokkasota) was in currency by left-wing socialists 
and Communists. The victors of the war named it ‘war for Freedom’ (vapaussota), or ‘war for 
liberation’ (as against the Russian imperialism). Contrary to the Greek case, the Reds in Finland 
were using ‘civil’ or ‘class war’ during the actual fighting in 1918 (Alapuro 2002).  
 
The memorization of the civil war 
 
 After the war was over and for the decades to come, the semantics and the political vocabulary 
changed. Here one should distinguish two periods where a symbolic battle for the hegemony of 
the public memory has been taking place:  

(a) During the period 1949-1974, the official account of the Right as well as the account 
of  the  right-minded  man  of  the  street  had  been  still  that  of  symmoritopolemos  (war  against 
bandits) or rebellion. On the contrary, as early as 1957 the KKE used for the first time the word 
emphylios polemos with regards to the 1946-49 inner-state violent clashes. Until then, the party’s 
elites  were  speaking  of  ‘liberating  war’  or  even  ‘revolutionary’  war;  especially  in  the 
countryside, people of the Left were speaking of the “second guerilla war” (deftero andartiko). 
In fact, that was a devastating period for the Left which was not only defeated in the war but it 
has  been  politically  excluded  and  marginalized  until  1974.  The  KKE  was  banned  and  the 
ideology  of  ethnikofrosini  (national-mindedness)  was  dominant  in  every  single  sector  of  the 
public  sphere.  Against  this,  and  probably  as  part  of  a  defense  mechanism  and  as  part  of  a 
symbolic struggle, the official Left and its ordinary supporters as well the anti-monarchist camp 
gradually adopted wholeheartedly the term emphylios polemos as a tragic phase of contemporary 
Greek history whose victim is the Greek people in toto.   
 
(b) From 1974 onwards a spectacular change took place in the memorization of the civil 
war.  With  the  restoration  of  democracy  and  especially  after  the  1981  general  elections,  when 
Socialists, led by Andreas Papandreou, took office for the first time in the country’s history, and 
after the legal recognition of the resistance (Law 1285/1982), symmoritopolemos was virtually 
banned from the public and official political language of the Right. This was the aftermath of the 
unprecedented  long  lived  hegemony  of  a  leftward  political  culture,  endowed  with  plenty 
nationalist-populists  overtones  and  anti-americanism.  Since  then  emphylios  polemos  has  been 
univocally used in public speeches, in political documents, even in legislation and jurisprudence. 
Consequently,  according  the  1863/1989  Law  ,  symmoritopolemos  was  officially  replaced  by 

 

115

emphylios polemos whose duration was defined from 1944 to 1949. Besides the word ‘bandits’ 
(symmotites) was replaced by ‘Democratic Army’ (Dimokratikos Stratos). That law was enacted 
by  the  three-month  coalition  government  of  the  Right-wing  party  of  Nea  Democratia  (New 
Democracy) and the Left-wing party of Synaspismos (Left Coalition) and apparently had great 
symbolic impact with respect to the abrogation of the civil war consequences.   

  Seemingly,  along  these  symbolic  battles  a  politics  of  oblivion  was  gradually  put  into 

effect. In the remainder of this section I shall refer to some crucial constituents of this politics:  

(i)  With  respect  to  the  historical/official  memory,  the  date  of  the  end  of  the  civil  war 
(1949, August 29th) has never been celebrated as a National Day. Of course, there were a number 
of minor and local celebrations and political rituals with reference to the communists’ victims, 
but the end of the civil war as such was not commemorated in any substantial way, as it was the 
case in Franco’s Spain. Likewise, for all the devastation incurred by the WWII, in Greece May 
the 8th is not celebrated as the end of the Big War. Instead it is the 28th of October, the day of the 
beginning of the victorious Greek-Italian war, which is celebrated as a National Day112. Since 
the end of the WWII almost coalesces with the beginning of the civil war, the winning national 
elite didn’t wish to connect the two events (Voglis 2008). 

(ii) More so than it already was in the fifties and sixties - with the exception of the seven 
years  dictatorship  (1967-1974)  whereas  references  and  allegations  to  the  civil  war  were  made 
more often-, an effective by-passing of the civil war from the official memory was accomplished 
in 1982, shortly after Papandreou’s government took office (see above). The official recognition 
of  the  resistance  of  various  groups  and  of  course  EAM  was  characterized  as  ‘National 
Resistance’  which  is  ever  since  officially  commemorated  in  November  25,  with  not  much 
enthusiasm  though;  that  day  in  1942  a  major  sabotage  against  the  Axis  was  accomplished  in 
common  by  ELAS  and  EDES.  Typically  the  recognition  was  conferred  to  the  individual 
resistance  fighters  who  were  awarded  an  appropriate  title  and  pension.  Apparently,  a 
mythologization had been taking place since the period of resistance (1941-4) was cleaned up 
from  any  disturbing  stains  of  internecine  conflict  and  radical  -if  not  virtually  revolutionary-, 
projects, subjugated entirely to the nationalist discourse. Sometimes, the retroactive recall of the 
resistance period is accomplished through metaphysical and almost religious metaphors; one of 
our  informants  said:  [  …  whoever  lived  that  era,  whether  today  is  in  the  right  of  left  side,  is  like 
receiving the Holy Communion, as if one drinks fresh water from a source, it is something you get power 
from…](woman, aged 84). By this token, the old names of hundreds of streets and squares all 
over the country were changed overnight into ‘National Resistance’. In a prominent and historic 
square in the center of Athens a great statue was erected dedicated to ‘national reconciliation’. In 
contradistinction,  the  public  commemoration  of  the  civil  war  is  rare  and  sporadic,  inflicting 
sometimes embarrassment and bitterness. A ritual of great significance for the ‘nationalization’ 
of the resistance and the promotion of ‘national reconciliation’ was the ceremonial and widely 
mediatized burning of hundred of thousands, if not millions, of police files of the so-called ‘non-
nationally  minded’  citizens  which  took  place  in  29.08.89  in  spite  the  objections  of  Greek 
historians.     

(iii) If officially the national resistance was forwarded as a ‘chosen glory’ (Volkan 2005), 
and even if the official, not to say hegemonic, attitude was that of silence and forgetting, at the 
level of collective/popular memory and living political culture the situation has been quite more 
complicated.  As  Halbwachs  (1992:  172,  182)    Connerton  (1989:  38-99)  and  Aguilar  (1996) 
                                                
112 For quite different reasons, the Baltic countries do not celebrate the 8th of May either; for them the real liberation 
came on 1991 when the Soviet empire collapsed. 

        

 

 

116

rightly  argue,  collective  memory  is  by  definition  multifaceted  and  divided  alongside  the  lived 
experiences  and  local  memories  of  different  groups  and  individuals  who  witness  and  shape 
historical events, notwithstanding their traumatic potential. At the level of unofficial collective 
memory, therefore, the civil war has been recollected antagonistically until the early 1980s. Even 
if until then the political discourse implied silence on the matter, the undercurrent interpretations 
were sharply incommensurate (Voglis 2008)113. A divided collective memory emerged not only 
alongside the binary opposition between Left and Right but in accordance to a variety of local 
animosities  and  struggles  amidst  which  frequently  the  roles  of  victims  and  perpetrators  were 
mixed and interchanged.  

(iv)  It  is  misleading  to  draw  too  sharp  a  line  between  the  official/public  and  the 
collective/popular  memory;  in  the  on-going  hegemony  process  bridges  are  built  and  various 
kinds of overlapping are formed. By and large, on both sides silence about the civil war is the 
dominant  attitude.  With  some  exceptions,  even  nowadays  the  mnemonic  community  of  the 
defeated Left is built around the resistance rather than the civil war. This is repeatedly observed 
in  numerous  testimonies  and  narratives,  and  is  documented  in  the  qualitative  interviews 
conducted  on  the  occasion  of  this  paper.  Half  of  the  left  minded  informants  were  more  than 
reluctant to use the word emphylios polemos (civil war); as one of them mentioned: [… well the 
civil, I do not want to say the word, war between the Democratic Army and Governmental Army from ’46 
to  ’49  is  the  continuation  of  the  national  resistance  …]  (man).  According  to  another  one,  [… 
gradually,  after  1946  the  resistance  against  the  British  in  the  beginning  and  against  the  American 
afterwards has been named civil war] (man).      

The mnemonic community of the victorious Right is equally embarrassed with the civil 
war; I already mentioned that its victory was never celebrated as a national fest. A taboo issue is 
the  Greek  Security  Battalions,  which  were  collaborators  of  the  German  troops;  during  the 
December 1944 events they were the backbone of the anti-EAM forces and soon after most of 
their members jointed the National Army against DSE in order to escape legal prosecution for 
war  crimes.  Actually,  unlike  other  European  countries114,  in  Greece  the  punishment  of 
collaborators  was  extremely  poor  and  they  survived  precisely  because  they  served  the  anti-
communist  cause  (Haidia  2000).  In  addition,  large  parts  of  the  newly  formed  post-war  ruling 
class were has roots in collaborators and black market dealers during the occupation or usurpers 
of Jewish property. As a consequence, these things are preferable to suppress than to recall, let 
alone to be pride of. All in all then, in both Left and Right community of memory and political 
discourse the fatal ‘national tragedy’ of the civil war has been systematically juxtaposed to the 
‘epic of national resistance’.              

This  politics  of  oblivion  bears  witness  two  defense  mechanisms  Smelser    (2004) 
underscores  as  to  cultural-social  trauma:  ‘displacement’  and  ‘projection’  with  regards  to  the 
attribution of responsibility and the rationalization of trauma. The 1946-49 civil war is ultimately 
interpreted as the outcome of British and US intervention in Greek political life; the December 
1944  events,  let  alone  the  1943-44  conflicts  between  ELAS,  EDES  and  the  Greek  Security 
Battalions  are  scarcely  mentioned  openly.  Scapegoats,  expiatory  victims,  and  conspiratorial 
explanations  of  history  have  been  more  than  frequently  employed  to  identify  causes  and 
consequences  of  the  civil  war.  For  instance,  in  1945,  the  secretary-general  of  the  KKE 
                                                 
113 Among others, this is evidenced in the proliferation of the left-oriented publication of memoirs, auto-biographies, 
and diaries referred to above. 
114 In France, for instance, until 1945 almost 10.000 ‘traitors’ were killed with no trial. Later on, 1.600 were 
executed according to death verdicts (Fleischer 2008: 235).  

 

117

(Kommounistiko Komma Ellados: Communist Party of Greece) Nikos Zachariadis denounced the 
previous secretary-general and the majority of the party’s central committee for the December 
events, and in turn Zachariadis himself was officially denounced by his own party later on (1957) 
for the waging of the civil war. Hundreds of executive members who disagreed with the official 
decisions  were  physically  exterminated  by  the  party’s  death  squads  OPLA  (Organosi 
Perifrourisis  Laikou  Agona:  Organization  for  the  Protection  of  the  People’s  Struggle);  the 
accusation was spying and petty bourgeois mentality. To mention bypassing that the acronym 
OPLA sounds the same with the Greek word arms; it is more than obvious that this was a living 
metaphor designating death. 

 Apart from that, and in the years to come after the war, the self-representation of the Left 
was  that  of  the  expiatory  victim.  The  public  memory  of  the  leftward  side  selected  the 
innumerable atrocities it suffered by the so called “white terrorism” of the Right between 1945-
1946 as well as the unbearable prosecutions they endured during and after the war (executions, 
exile, imprisonments, rapes, tortures, social marginalization etc); at the same time however, they 
repressed or even disavowed their own malpractices, atrocities, and responsibilities115. Likewise, 
the Right has been more than reluctant to memorize about 5000 of its opponents executed by the 
extraordinary  courts-martial  and  nearly  70000  prisoners  and  exiles  who  were  convicted  from 
1947 to early 1950s. Yet, the public memory of the Right selectively detains the ‘red terror’ and 
the communists’ crimes.   
 
Besides, the attribution of responsibility for the civil war to the British and the Americans 
is  a  classic  example  of  the  conspiratorial  explanation  of  history,  quite  common  in  the  Greek 
populist  political  discourse,  either  Left  of  Right116.  Under  these  terms,  Greeks  in  toto  are  the 
expiatory victims of the foreigners. Another similar defense mechanism is the double tendency 
of remembering and forgetting. For one and the same traumatic event as the Greek civil war, 
precisely because it constitutes a field of competing interpretations and significations, there is, on 
the  one  hand,  the  demand  to  “leave  everything  behind  us”  on  the  name  of  ‘national 
reconciliation’;  on  the  other  hand,  however,  there  is  the  injunction  to  “preserve  our  historical 
memory” forwarded principally by the Right. Both options are cases of unsuccessful mourning 
and,  paradoxically,  in  spite  of  been  profound  political  options,  they  depoliticize  the  civil  war 
itself  by  subsuming  it  into  the  nationalistic  universe  of  discourse.  The  adversarial  political 
identities  of  the  opponents  of  the  1940s  are  symbolically  transfigured  to  extend  that  (a)    any 
revolutionary  or  counter-revolutionary  potential  of  the  civil  war  has  been  systematically 
suppressed  from  the  public  discourse  and  the  popular  memory;  (b)  the  opponents  were 
discursively endowed with non-political, nearly metaphysical, traits: noble defenders of the race 
and  the  nation,  on  the  one  side,  and    selfless  and  benign  patriots  who  chase  the  reactionary 
servants  of  imperialism,  on  the  other  side.  Even  the  bridging  of  the  opposition  described  as 
‘reconciliation’ instead of ‘compromise’ has its own significance; actually, ‘reconciliation’ is the 
counterpart  of  internecine  war  as  it  presupposes  two  formerly  homogenous  parts  which  only 
temporarily  have  been  put  apart.  On  the  contrary,  devoid  of  any  value  or  moral  echo, 
                                                 
115  There is ample evidence that even among the women political prisoners, the fighters who “held gun” were set 
apart and seen cautiously since the line of the party was that its members in prison were detained because of their 
opinions and not because of their doings.  
 
116 Likewise, the dominant account of the civil war in today’s Finland resides in the seemingly inconceivable revolt 
of a part of the people "against itself" by projecting the cause of the war outside the nation. Reds were "infected" or 
"misled" by the Russians to betray their own fatherland (Alapuro 2002).  

 

118

‘compromise’ is a political concept premised on power relations and convergence of strategic 
projects in a public sphere (Kotarides – Sideris 2002: 117-8).    
 
As a matter of fact, the above described politics of oblivion did not contribute to a sort of 
Vergangenheitsbewältigung,  i.e.  a  systematic  reappraisal  and  collective  process  of  coming  to 
terms  with  the  past.  Yet,  this  is  not  a  Greek  peculiarity;  in  all  countries  that  took  part  in  the 
WWII  there  are  some  dark  aspects  in  the  way  they  treat  their  past.  For  instance,  for  many 
decades in France a sort of national amnesia surrounded the Vichy issue and it was suppressed or 
unacknowledged that the great majority of the French gave credence to, or were aligned with, 
Petain and his regime. In equal measure, in Latvia it is denied that the biggest and perhaps the 
most  competent  non-German  military  force  embedded  in  the  Nazi  troops  during  the  WWII 
consisted by Letts and that among the most fanatic defenders of Hitler’s shelter in the combat of 
Berlin were Letts fighters. One of the most successful management of public memory ever in the 
post war European history is Italy’s self-characterization as victim and enemy of the Germans 
based  on  the  national  myth  of  the  good  Italian  (Italiani  brava  gente)  and  a  veil  of  silence 
obscuring that only at the very end of the war Italy declared the war to Germany, purging thus all 
war crimes and atrocities its troops committed in hands with the Nazis (Ricoeur 2004: 449-52; 
Fleischer 2008: 196, 209, 234, 246-7). To press the point further, the encomium of the resistance 
as opposed to the civil war in Greece is part and parcel of a collective myth and a hegemonic 
strategy for the definition of the public and collective memory. During the first post war years 
and later on, in many if not all Western and Eastern countries, the legend of an instant, popular 
and  mass  resistance  to  the  axis  served  as  a  symbolic  means  for:  (1)  national  (re)union,  (2) 
purging  of  plenty  anti-Semitic  atrocities  hidden  behind  the  Holocaust,  (3)  forging  a  common 
European  identity  (Fleischer  2008:  228,  236;  Antoniou  and  Marantzidis  2008:  14-5).  Greece, 
torn apart by Occupation and a civil war, could not be an exception.                         
 
The affect dimension during and after the war was over 
 
It was mentioned above that a host of left leaning non academic literature about the civil war and 
the  resistance  was  produced  after  1974,  when  the  democratic  regime  was  restored,    the 
communist party(ies) was recognized, and the ‘national resistance’ was legally acknowledged. 
Most of this literature was written by prominent actors of the 1940s. One of the central concerns 
of these writings was the reconstitution of the official memory of the Left and therefore the re-
articulation of the left identity within the new political cultural setting. This was accomplished 
by the overstatement of the communists’ contribution to the resistance and the understatement of 
their accountability for the civil war.  In the new political cultural setting and the new structure 
of political opportunities and constrains, the mnemonic discursive strategy of the communist left 
was entangled into a symbolic antinomy: by claiming the glory of the resistance they were no 
longer morally defeated, while at the same time they were still the victims of the post civil war 
state  of  political  affairs.  This  antinomy  has  been/is  grounded  on  two  mutually  exclusive 
mnemonic vectors: on the one hand, the silencing of the old sharp opposition to the class society, 
i.e. the ultimate stake of the communists’ civil war, and the affirmation of the national society 
they wanted to be part of, on the other. Effectively, this antinomy was premised on a particular 
sort of emotional reflexivity. By ‘emotional reflexivity’ I mean a sort of emotional dynamics, a 
capacity,  to  negotiate  relationships  by  changing  the  structure  of  feeling  and,  therefore,  how 
others feel within these relationships. It is a process in which social actors have feelings about 
and try to understand and alter their lives in relation to others (Holmes 2008). Accordingly, the 

 

119

defense  of  the  resistance  was/is  meant  to  de-stigmatize  the  Greek  communists  as  traitors  and 
national outcasts, while at the same time it was a symbolic means for transforming the trauma of 
humiliation they experienced after the defeat in the civil war into a full blown pride that deserves 
to  full  fledged  citizens.  The  de-stigmatizing  emotional  reflexivity  has  been  carried  through  a 
justifying  discourse  guided  by  a  militant  testimonial  zeal  (Panagiotopoulos  1994)  which,  as  a 
rule,  framed  the  Greek  communists  as  martyrs  of  the  homeland  during  the  occupation  and 
innocent victims of a revengeful state. It is not accidental that some of our reviewed subjects 
used  the  word  ‘Golgotha’  in  order  to  describe  their  experience  as  victims  of  the  war,  i.e.  a 
religious metaphor via which their activities acquire a non-political trait. Just only recently very 
few intellectuals of the Left deviate from this justifying discourse by discretely referring to the 
civil war as a strategic political option carried out by the Greek Communist Party in the 1940s 
and not as a fatal tragedy of the Greek people as a whole.  
 
The mnemonic discursive strategies of the Left and its emotional reflexivity cannot be 
properly interpreted unless taking into account the emotional consequences of the defeat in the 
civil war as well as the left emotional habitus during the decades before the war. To start from 
the  latter,  one  should  take  into  consideration  that  almost  from  the  beginning  the  political 
socialization of the Greek communists was carried out in an emotional climate of self-asserted 
marginalization. As an aftermath of the Bolshevists’ revolution, the Greek Communist Party was 
founded in 1918. From early on, the party as an institution and its individual members were at 
pains to comply with the official policies of the state as they departed from the directions of the 
Third International which were followed faithfully by the party in line with the Marxist-Leninist 
creed. In 1920 it strongly opposed the irredentist war in Minor Asia denouncing it as imperialist 
and  adventurous.  In  1924  it  supported  the  ‘unified  and  independent  Macedonia  and  Thrace’ 
propagating  the  idea  of  a  working  class  revolution  in  Greece  and  the  Balkans  (see  above).  
During  1929,  the  year  of  the  great  recession,  in  tandem  with  popular  sentiment  it  organized 
plenty  militant  rallies  and  strikes  which  resulted  in  severe  casualties  and  deaths.  In  1930  it 
unsuccessfully  declared  general  political  strike  and  advocated  the  establishment  of  the  soviet 
regime in Greece.  
 
The repressive apparatuses of the state responded harshly to these political projects by 
prosecuting hundreds of party members. What is more, the 1936 Metaxas dictatorship denounced 
the communist party as illegal; almost 2000 of its members and cadres were arrested or exiled 
and approximately the entire network of its organization was demolished by the secret police. 
Those who remained free had to follow strict conspiracy rules in their contact to each other and 
in their private everyday life.  
 
Given  the  quasi  religious  adherence  to  the  communist  utopia,  these  experiences  and 
practices  had  contributed  to  the  shaping  of  an  emotional  climate  and  habitus  of  strong  group 
mindness, suspiciousness against real or alleged police agents, traitors and revisionists within the 
party  ranks,  disciplinary  solidarity,  as  well  as  a  mentality  of  the  righteous  or  even  expiatory 
victim. By and large, this emotional habitus was reactivated during the resistance and after the 
defeat in the battle of Athens in December 1944 and the 1946-49 civil war. In effect, it was a 
defense mechanism for coping with disappointment and humiliation. Yet, it could not shield the 
defeated all the way through the process of humiliating self-negation imposed by the post-war 
regime (Voglis 2000).  
It  was  mentioned  above  that  thousands  of  people  were  arrested,  exiled,  imprisoned, 
 
murdered or executed from the December events and thereafter. In addition to the battleground, a 
moral and emotional war was taking place as well. All detainees in prisons or places of exile 

 

120

were pressed to sign declarations of repentance in which they recanted their political ideas and 
the Communist party itself. This method of demoralization was applied for the first time during 
the Metaxas dictatorship but during the civil war it developed into an industry of recantation. In 
thousands of cases, with my father’s being one of them, these declarations were signed after long 
and  painful  processes  of  physical  and  psychological  torture.  What  is  more,  these  declarations 
were widely publicized in the local and national press as well as in the small village communities 
the repentants were coming from; those who signed were forced to prove their true rependance 
by informing against comrades, sending public letters repudiating communism, and by joining 
the  military  police  confining  and    torturing  their  former  comrades  and  friends.  As  one  of  our 
informants said [ … violence was immense, psychological mainly but physical as well … the moment I 
was forced to sign they commanded us to take an oath and to write three letters … one to the priest of our 
parish, one to the gendarmery of our region … and another one addressed to the newspapers …] (man, 
aged 83). 

    Through this mechanism these people were ‘reformed’ into nationally minded citizens 
and willy-nilly negated their past identity as moral and political subjects (Voglis 2000: 76-7). 
Not  a  few  could  not  stand  a  humiliation  of  this  kind  and  committed  suicide;  a  very  tough 
emotional cross-pressure was exerted on all those who signed but did not alter their belief in the 
communist cause as they were stigmatized by both the authorities and the party itself. Activating 
the reflex syndrome of suspicion, the party organization treated these people not as politically 
defeated and physically exhausted subjects but as sinful and compromised individuals who could 
not manage to defend the moral superiority of the party.  
 
After  the  civil  war  was  over  thousands  of  left-wingers  who  were  morally  cancelled, 
politically marginalized, socially stigmatized and personally exhausted, forced to find refuge in 
the  big  cities.  For  them,  as  well  as  for  their  immediate  descendants,  defeat  functioned  as  a 
‘cultural  trauma’,  as  a  painful  event  whose  retroactive  processing  in  memory  and  discourse 
caused disruptions and reconstructions in their collective identity. Essentially, there was no place 
for left-wingers in the public sphere, who were treated as second-class citizens. Their political 
marginalization caused them fear, anger, embarrassment and angst.  
 
Essentially,  until  the  end  of  the  50s,  the  space  for  any  strongly  worded  discourse 
challenging the post-civil war establishment was extremely narrow. But since the beginning of 
the crucial decade of the 60s that space widened as, on the one hand, the ‘Union of the Center’ 
party (Ένωση Κέντρου) challenged the dominance of ERE (the right-wing dominant party) and, 
on the other, the economic development in the tertiary and manufacturing sector allowed for the 
massive  and  very  fast  accession  of  the  domestic  migrants  to  the  labor  market.  There  existed, 
however, an unbridgeable contradiction: while economic incorporation continues and creates the 
conditions for social consensus and the gradual de-EAMification of the petit bourgeois masses 
(Charalambis,  1989:  196),  the  structure  of  the  post-civil  war  state  (palace,  army,  national-
mindedness, etc.) did not allow for the lifting of their political exclusion. The petit bourgeoisified 
civil war defeated, already incorporated in the market and the consumerist way of life, demanded 
moral recognition and political representation. In the new socio-economic environment their fear 
gradually  gave  way  to  resentful  indignation.  It  was  precisely  because  their  social  opportunity 
structure had changed and therefore they were able to express the accumulated emotional energy 
and  transform  the  feeling  of  indignation  to  a  material-political  force:  where  else  could  the 
massive social rallies of the period be based and in what other way could they be expressed, if 
not in a mixture of indignation and hope? 
 
Yet,  under  the  prospect  of  losing  control  in  the  parliamentary  elections  scheduled  for 
May 1967, April’s coup d’etat in effect blocked every outlet for the democratic incorporation of 

 

121

indignation,  during 

the  not  nationally  minded  in  the  political  system  and  cancelled  the  mood  for  further  massive 
protests.  On  top  of  the  cultural  trauma  of  the  civil  war,  there  now  came  the  trauma  of  the 
imposition of dictatorship. So there was formed a belief in the fatality of political inequality and 
marginalization and the impossibility of its overcoming. The humiliation of the defeated in the 
civil war was not lifted but, on the contrary, accentuated. As I have argued elsewhere (Demertzis 
2006), the main consequence of the dictatorship in terms of cultural trauma analysis is that the 
contradiction  between  the  desire  for  political  and  moral  recognition  and  the  powerlessness  to 
impose it, combined with the chronic and traumatic reliving of endless vindictiveness, hostility 
and  indignation,  produced  a  deep-rooted  ressentiment.  Based  on  Max  Scheler  (1961)  I  regard 
ressentiment  as  an  unpleasant  moral  feeling  without  specific  addressees,  which  operates  as  a 
chronic reliving of repressed and endless vindictiveness, hostility, envy and indignation due to 
the impotence of the subject in expressing them in social practice. To the extent that dictatorship 
overturned  the  democratizing  potential  of  the  mid  1960s,  it  can  be  argued  that  a  significant 
portion  of  pre-dictatorial  resentment  qua  moral 
the  dictatorship 
dematerializes  and  is  transformed  into  ressentiment.  The  injustice  of  political  marginalization 
and  the  post-civil  war  establishment  were  perceived  to  be  an  inescapable  fate  leading  to  an 
experience of impotence and inferiority. However, as soon as PASOK took office in 1981 and 
the  lower  middle  strata  stemming  from  the  defeated  in  the  civil  war  (the  ‘non  privileged’  in 
Andreas Papandreou’s populist rhetoric) found themselves integrated into the political system, 
ressentiment  gave  place  to  vengeance  precisely  because  it  could  be  released  and  acted  out 
publicly. Party mass clientelism (Lyrintzis, 1984) and the ‘green-guards’ (PASOK’s cadres who 
dominated in trade unions, the public sector and state mechanisms) were the compensation for 
the ‘stony years’ of the political marginalization. But apparently vengeance cannot be the only 
emotion  stemmed  from  Papandreou’s  policies  favorable  to  the  former  political  and  social 
outcasts; many must have experienced disappointment combined with bitterness, a kind of half 
hearted satisfaction, when the National Resistance was recognized and they received, by law, a 
pension for their contribution to the country. What two of our interviewed said about it might 
reflect  a  more  widespread  mood:  […they  got  me  in  trial  for  high  treason  …  us  who  fought  the 
Germans … they give me a 320 euros pension … this is the way they compensate us … can you imagine? 
… here we had the greatest resistance throughout Europe…] (man, aged  85). [… we risked our lives 
and this makes us proud … those memories are great but painful, it is the most patriotic and heroic I’ve 
ever  lived.  Well,  nowadays  I  am  looking  at  my  self,  my  house  etc,  I’ve  become  a  petty  bourgeois  like 
others] (man, aged 83). 
 
Overall,  sixty  years  after  the  end  of  the  war,  our  left  minded  informants  experience 
retroactively a fusion of negative and positive feelings: rage, resentment, anger, disgust or even 
hatred together with pride, moral satisfaction and responsibility spring out from their narrations.     
 
 Contrary to what currently passes as left leaning common sense with regards to the civil 
war  trauma,  I  want  to  argue  that  this  war  was  traumatogenic  to  the  right  side  of  the  Greek 
political spectrum as well.     
   
       
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 

    ……………………………………………………………. 

 

122

of 

the 

by 

both 

sides 

(silence, 

pursued 

‘nationalization’ 

Stemming from a personal interest and in pace with the fundamental tenets of cultural trauma 
theory, i.e. identity, memory, emotion, a (re)interpretation of the Greek civil war was attempted 
throughout this paper. This interpretation was based primarily on the already existing impressive 
research literature, partly on findings from original qualitative research, and to some extent on 
comparisons  between  the  Greek  and  other  civil  wars.  After  sixty  years,  that  war  still  ignites 
Greeks’ political psyche, maybe not so fervently as the former decades. The main reason why 
this cultural trauma has repercussions after so many years is the partial failure of the politics of 
oblivion 
resistance, 
forgetting/manipulated  public  memory).  Alike  other  countries,  in  Greece,  a  systematic 
reappraisal and a coming to terms with the past has not been generated. As a result, despite the 
claims of national reconciliation, the issue of forgiving has not been raised seriously as yet.  
 
Forgiveness  is  crucial  to  the  cultural  trauma  theory  because  a  consistent  concept  of 
trauma,  as  a  living  metaphor,  refers  to  a  dynamic  process  which  includes  both  the  traumatic 
element  itself  and  the  process  of  its  healing.  Forgiveness  is  part  of  the  healing  process,  an 
integral element of mourning. Certainly, to forgive is not to forget, nor is it denial or disavowal. 
Forgiveness  entails  transformation  of  negative  emotions  based  on  strong  will,  a  will  to  start 
anew, a gesture quite opposite to vengeance. Forgiveness is never predicted, as it comes out of 
free  will  and  frees  both  doer  and  sufferer  from  the  relentless  automatism  of  a  vicious  cycle 
(Arendt 1958: 236-241).  What is more, forgiveness can be offered unconditionally only by those 
(previous victims) who are able to punish perpetrators (Ricouer 2004: 470). But who exactly is 
the victim and who is the perpetrator in the Greek civil war? Who is supposed to forgive whom?  
 
This question was unthinkable ten years ago due to the unshaken hegemony of the left 
minded accounts of the civil war. Today, whoever utters this question has: (a) to steer clear from 
negationism and historical revisionism (which is not identical with revisionist historiography); 
(b) to deconstruct the commanded forgetting of the civil war and the mythology that surrounds 
the so called ‘national resistance’; (c) to promote a spirit of ‘difficult forgiveness’.  Certainly, it 
will be a long process which ultimately concerns the next generation, my generation, as the real 
participants in the civil war are passing away. Yet, it might be less painful and it may leave room 
for a mutual request for and offering of forgiveness.         

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

123

 
Aguilar, P. (1996). Memoria y olvido de la Guerra Civil espanola. Madrid: Alianza Editorial. 
 
Alapuro, R. (2002). “Coping with the Civil War of 1918 in Twenty-first Century Finland”. In 
Kenneth  Christie  &  Robert  Cribb  (eds.)  Historical  Injustice  and  Democratic  Transition  in 
Eastern  Asia  and  Northern  Europe:  Ghosts  at  the  Table  of  Democracy.  London:  Curzon,  pp. 
169-183. 
 
Alexander,  J.  (2003).  The  Meanings  of  Social  Life.  A  Cultural  Sociology,  Oxford :  Oxford 
University Press. 

 

Alexander,  J.  (2004).  ‘Toward  a  Theory  of  Cultural  Trauma’  in  In  Jeffrey  Alexander,  Ron 
Eyerman,  Bernhard  Giesen,  Neil  J.  Smelser,  and  Piotr  Sztompka  (eds.).  Cultural  Trauma  and 
Collective Identity, 1–30. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 
Antoniou, G. and Marantzidis, N. (2008). « The insisting past”. In Antoniou, G. – Marantzidis, 
N. (eds.). The Era of Confusion. The 40s and Historiography. Athens: Estia, pp. 11-52. 
    
Arendt, H. (1958). The Human Condition. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
 
Charalambis,  D.  (1989).  Clientelism  and  Populism.  The  Extra-institutional  Consensus  in  the 
Greek Political System. Athens: Exandas Publications. 
 
Charalambis,  D.  and    Demertzis,  N.  (1993).  Politics  and  Citizenship  in  Greece:  Cultural  and 
Structural Facets. Journal of Modern Greek Studies vol.11(2), 219-40. 
 
Clogg, R. (1979), A Short History of Modern Greece, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P. 
 
Connerton, P. (1989). How Societies Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

 

Coufoudakis, V. (1981). “The Greek Civil War and the United Nations”. In John Iatrides (ed.) 
Greece in the 1940s. A Nation in Crisis. University Press of New England, Hanover and London. 
 
Demertzis, N. (1996). The Nationalist Discourse. Ambivalent semantic field and contemporary 
tendencies. Athens: Ant. N. Sakkoulas Publishers. 
 
Demertzis, N. (1997). „Greece“. In R. Eatwell (ed.), European Political Culture (pp. 107- 121). 
London: Routledge. 
 

Demertzis,  N.  (2006).  «Emotions  and  Populism”.  In    S.  Clarke,  P.  Hoggett    &  S.  Thompson 
(eds.) Power, Passion and Politics . London:  Palgrave, pp. 103-122. 

 

124

 
Demertzis, N. (2009). „Mediatising Traumas in the Risk Society. A Sociology of Emotions 
Approach”. In Hopkins, Debra, Jochen Kleres, Helena Flam, and Helmut Kuzmics (eds.). 
Theorizing Emotions: Sociological Explorations and Applications.  
Frankfurt am Main, New York: Campus (in print), pp. 115-140. 
 
Dordanas, S. & Michaelidis, I. (2007). “Critical Literature Review for the Civil War (1990-
2006)”. In Ioannis Mourelos & Iakovos Michaelidis (eds.). The Greek Civil War. An Assessment. 
Political, ideological, historiographical repercussions. Athens: Ellinika Grammata, pp. 183-194. 
    
Elephantis, A. (2003). They’ve Got Our Athens. Re-reading History 1941-50. Athens: 
Vivliorama.  
 
Fearon, J and Laitin, D.D. (2003). “Ethnicity, Insurgency,and Civil War”. In American Political 
Science Review 97(1): 75-90. 
 
Fleischer, H. (1986). Im Kreuzschatten der Maechte: Griechenland 1941-1944. (Okkupation – 
Kollaboration- Resistance), Frankfurt/Bern/New York. 
 
Fleischer, H. (2008). Wars of Memory. World War II in Public History. Athens: Nefeli  
Publications.  
 
Haidia, E. (2000). ‘The Punishment of Collaborators in Northern Greece, 1945-1946’. In Mark 
Mazower (ed.). After the War was Over. Reconstructing the Family, Nation, and State in Greece, 
1943-1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 42-61. 
 
Halbwachs, M. (1992). On Collective Memory. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago 
Press. 
 
Holmes, M. (2008). “The Emotionalization of Reflexivity”. In Sociology vol. 43. 
 
Iatrides, J. (2002). “The international context of the Greek civil war”. In E. Nikolakopoulos, A. 
Rigos, G. Psallidas (eds.). The Civil War. From Varkiza to Grammos. February 1945 – August 
1949. Themelio. Athens, pp. 31-50. 
 
Kalyvas, S. (2000). “Red Terror: Leftist Violence during the Occupation”. In Mark Mazower 
(ed.). After the War was Over. Reconstructing the Family, Nation, and State in Greece, 1943-
1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 142-183. 
 
Kalyvas, S. (2002). “Forms, Dimensions and Practices of Violence in Civil War (1943-1949): 
An initial approach”. In E. Nikolakopoulos, A. Rigos, G. Psallidas (eds.). The Civil War. From 
Varkiza to Grammos. February 1945 – August 1949. Themelio. Athens, pp. 188-207. 
 
Kalyvas, S. (2003). “The Civil War (1943-1949): The End of Myths and the Turn Toward the 
Mass Level”. In Science and Society, n. 11, pp. 37-70 (in Greek). 
 

 

125

Kohn, H. (1961). The Idea of Nationalism. A Study in its Origins and Background. New York: 
The MacMillan Company (2nd edition). 
 
Kolko, G. (1994). Century of War. Politics, Conflict, and Society Since 1914. The New Press, 
New York. 
 
Kotarides, N. – Sideris, N. (2002). ‘Civil War: Ideological and Political Stakes”. In E. 
Nikolakopoulos, A. Rigos, G. Psallidas (eds.). The Civil War. From Varkiza to Grammos. 
February 1945 – August 1949. Themelio. Athens, pp. 115-124. 
 
Koulouris, N. (2000). A Greek Bibliography of the Civil War, 1945-1949. Athens: Filistor.  
 
Lyrintzis,  Ch.,  (1984).  “Political  Parties  in  Post-Junta  Greece:  A  case  of  ‘bureaucratic 
clientelism?’ in Pridham, G. (ed.). The New Mediterranean Democracies. Regime transition in 
Spain, Greece and Portugal. London: Frank Cass, pp. 99-118. 
 
Mann, M. (1992). “The Emergence of Modern European Nationalism”. In John Hall (ed.). 
Transition to Modernity.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 137-165.  
 
Marantzides, N. (2002). “Ethnic Dimensions of the Civil War”. In E. Nikolakopoulos, A. Rigos, 
G. Psallidas (eds.). The Civil War. From Varkiza to Grammos. February 1945 – August 1949. 
Themelio. Athens, pp. 208-221. 
 
Marantzides,  N.  &  Antoniou,  G.  (2003).  The  Greek  Civil  War  Historiography  (1945-2001): 
Journal  of  Historiography,  2003:  1 
Towards 
(http://www.columbia.edu/cu/history/gha/cjh/2003_4.htm) 
 
 
Marantzides, N. & Antoniou, G. (2004). “The Axis Occupation and Civil War: Changing Trends 
in Greek Historiography, 1941-2002”. In Journal of Peace Research. 41(2): 223-231. 
 
Margarides, G. (1989). ‘Internecine conflicts in Occupation (1941-1944): Analogies and 
differences’. In H. Fleischer and N. Svoronos (eds.). Greece 1936-1944. Dictatorship, 
Occupation, Resistance. Athens: Cultural Institute of the Agricultural bank of Greece, pp. 505-
515. 
 
Mazower, M. (2000). “Three Forms of Political Justice: Greece, 1944-1945”. In Mark Mazower 
(ed.). After the War was Over. Reconstructing the family, nation, and state in Greece, 1943-
1960. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, pp. 24-41.  
 
Mouzelis, N. (1986). Politics in the Semi-Periphery. Early Parliamentarism and Late 
Industrialism in the Balkans and Latin America. London: MacMillan. 
 
Mylonas, H. (2003). “The Comparative Method and the Study of Civil Wars”. In Science and 
Society, n. 11, pp. 1-35 (in Greek). 
 

a  new  paradigm. 

In  Columbia 

 

126

Panagiotopoulos, P. (1997).”The representation of suffering in the narration of two extreme 
experiences: Giorgis Pikros, Makronissos Chronicle, Primo Levi, Si c’est un home”. In Dokimes, 
2: 13-32. 
 
Panagiotopoulos, P. (1997). ‘The communist memory of the defeat: analyzing the sociological 
premises of meta-historical justification’. In Dokimes, 6: 135-163.  
 
 
Papandreou, A. (1969). Democracy at gunpoint: the Greek front, New York:  Doubleday 
 
Richter, H. (1997). H επέμβαση των Άγγλων στην Ελλάδα. Από την  Βάρκιζα στον εμφύλιο 
πόλεμο. Φεβρουάριος 1945- Αύγουστος 1946, Αθήνα: Εστία. 
 
Ricoeur, P. (2004).  Memory, History, Forgetting. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 
Riggs, F. (1964). Administration in Developing Countries: The Theory of Prismatic Society. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 
 
Sambanis, N. (2002). “A Review od Recent Advances and Future Directions in the Literature on 
Civil War’. In Defense and peace Economics 13(2): 215-243. 
 
Sakkas, J. (2000). “The Civil War in Evritania”. In Mark Mazower (ed.). After the War was 
Over. Reconstructing the Family, Nation, and State in Greece, 1943-1960. Princeton University 
Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 184-209. 
 
Scheler, M., (1961). Ressentiment. Glencoe: Free Press 
 
 
Sfikas, Th. (2002).”The ‘peace-war’ dimension of the Greek Civil War: Peace Initiatives and 
Possibilities of Compromise. 1945-1949”. In E. Nikolakopoulos, A. Rigos, G. Psallidas (eds.). 
The Civil War. From Varkiza to Grammos. February 1945 – August 1949. Themelio. Athens, pp. 
75-101. 
 
Sugar, P. F. (1969). “External and Domestic Roots of Eastern European Nationalism”. In Peter 
Sugar and Ivo Lederer (eds.).Nationalism in Eastern Europe. Washington: University of 
Washington Press, pp. 3-54.  
 
Tsoukalas, k, (1969), The Greek Tragedy, London: Hamondsworth, Penguin 
 
Voglis, P. (2000). “Between Negation and Self-Negation: Political Prisoners in Greece, 1945-
1950”. In Mark Mazower (ed.). After the War was Over. Reconstructing the Family, Nation, and 
State in Greece, 1943-1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 73-90. 
 
Voglis, P. (2002). Becoming a Subject. Political Prisoners during the Greek Civil War. European 
University Institute: Florence.  
 

 

127

Voglis, P. (2008). ‘Memories of the 1940s as a topic of historical analysis: methodological 
proposals’. In Ρ.-Β.  Μπούσχοτεν, Τ. Βερβενιώτη, Ε. Βουτυρά, Β. Δαλκαβούκης, Κ. Μπάδα 
(επ.), Μνήμες και Λήθη του Ελληνικού Εμφυλίου Πολέμου. Επίκεντρο: Θεσσαλονίκη, 2008, pp. 
61-80.  
 
Volkan, V. (2005). ‘Large-Group Identity and Chosen Trauma”. In Psychoanalysis Downunder, 
Issue #6  (on-line Journal).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

128

Rui Gao 
Yale University 
Draft for Paper to be Presented at the ‘Trauma Workshop’ 
May 13, 2009 
 

Revolutionary Trauma and Representation of the War: the Case of China in Mao’s Era 

 
For millions of Chinese who had the misfortune to live during the span of the War of 
Resistance Against Japan (1937-1945), their personal experience must have been unbearably 
traumatic and painful. During the 8 years of the war, China lost three million lives in combat, 
and the civilian casualties is estimated to be about twenty million117. And the heinous nature of 
the war atrocity committed by the invading army must have left indelible marks on memories 
and consciousness of millions of war victims, of which the Nanking Massacre and the crimes of 
No. 731 Special Forces are but two particularly atrocious cases. Such massively shared suffering 
and injustice, however, as vivid as it must have been in each war victims’ minds, remained 
ultimately private and individual: for many years after the building of the new state, it seldom if 
ever, found its way into the public sphere of expression.  

Why is this the case? One of the goals of this chapter is to delve into this curious 

phenomenon and to seek explanations from a cultural sociological point of view. As scholars of 
cultural trauma powerfully demonstrated, even widely shared suffering and injustice of 
enormous scale are not collectively traumatic in themselves, I argue that the horrendous misery 
and mass destruction brought by the war was never able to be translated into a cultural trauma 
for the collectivity; not only has there not been a successful trauma process occurring, the 
significance of the war was largely diminished by the triumph of other cultural traumas that had 
been powerfully constructed.  

My tasks in this chapter are therefore twofold. First, I attempt to reconstruct a grand 

narrative constructed in Mao’s era that tells the people about the modern history of China which 
eventually leads to the building of the new state. I argue that the new national collectivity was 
built through the successful construction of a cultural trauma, a trauma of the old society when 
all the evil forces joined together to inflict injury and unbearable pain upon Chinese people. At 
the core of this ‘grand’ collective trauma, there was the more intensified and heightened trauma-
drama of class struggle, where the evil perpetrators in the old society were ‘condensed’ and 
‘epitomized’ into an absolute evil of class enemy and the unspeakable pain and suffering of the 
proletarian victims were recreated and relived by a broad sphere of people, who were solidly 
united into a new class collectivity via a strong symbolic and emotional identification with the 
victims.  

My second task is to examine how the experience of the War of Resistance Against Japan 
fits into this grand narrative. Tracing the representation of the war in the public sphere of Mao’s 
China and analyzing its relation with the grand narrative, I argue that the depiction and 
interpretation of the war is to certain extent determined by the intrinsic logic and strength of the 
                                                 
117 There perhaps has never been an accurate statistic of the loss of lives and numbers of casualties caused by the 
War of Resistance against Japan in Chinese society since the end of the War. There seems to be several official 
versions of estimation on both sides of the Taiwan strait, by the Nationalist government and the PRC government 
respectively; but none could claim to be THE most precise estimation. In general, the most widely spread version in 
PRC is that the cost of lives amounted at least up to twenty millions. The number I quoted came from estimation 
from the Nationalist government in Taiwan, as made clear in an article written by Chiang Kai-shek’s son in 
memorization of the ex-president who led the war of resistance.  

 

129

compelling grand narrative. It seems that in the hugely successful reconstruction of the grand 
narrative of revolution, representation of the war is a prosaic and much less relevant chapter, 
whose significance is severely mitigated because of an innate conflict it poses to the universal 
communist trauma of class struggle and the collective identity the latter so powerfully fostered.  

 

The Grand Narrative and the ‘Old Society’ 
 

As “community of memories” (Weber 1978:903), modern nations, from the moment of 
their birth, are defined and constructed by the collective memories upon which they build their 
collective identities and national grouping. And collective memoires, as a social construction 
contingent upon specific social configuration and historical conjuncture, is given form by 
mnemonic representations that are “circulated and stored in particular forms, such as narratives, 
pictorial images, textbooks, pamphlets, legal charters, wills, diaries, and statues” (Wagner-
Pacifici 1996:302, quoted in Saito 2006:354). In light with this, to trace the collective memories 
of revolutions and wars in the first two decades after the founding of the People’s Republic of 
China, one helpful approach is to reconstruct the grand narrative of history through which the 
nation defines and legitimizes itself and through which it shapes its next generation into proper 
social and national beings.  

A casual visit to the Tian’anmen Square could offer some helpful hint for the discovery 

of such a grand national narrative. At the very center of the Square, there erects the national 
monument of China, known as the ‘Monument to the People’s Heroes’. Unveiled in 1958 to 
commemorate the “Eternal Glory” of the martyrs who devoted their lives to the revolutionary 
struggle of Chinese people in the 19th and 20th centuries, the Monument plays a most important 
role in the self-definition of the new state as it is supposed to testify and crystallize the traumatic 
historical trajectory along which the new nation was brought into being. On the back of the 
monument, there is an inscription drafted by Mao Zedong and written by Zhou Enlai. It reads:  

 
"Eternal glory to the heroes of the people who laid down their lives in the people's war of 
liberation and the people's revolution in the past three years! Eternal glory to the heroes 
of the people who laid down their lives in the people's war of liberation and the people's 
revolution in the past thirty years! Eternal glory to the heroes of the people who from 
1840 laid down their lives in the many struggles against domestic and foreign enemies 
and for national independence and the freedom and well-being of the people! 
 
While the words here sound mundane and redundant, they carry with them important 

message that helps to decode the founding myth of the new nation. First, it is indicated in these 
words that the new state stands as the finale to an old era, but the ‘old era’ is not too old, but 
traced back to 1840, the beginning of the Opium War designated as the symbolic start of the 
modern history of China, or what is to be known as the one-century of humiliation and insult. 
Second, note that the order by which different eras are mentioned is reverse to the temporal 
order. I would argue later that such an arrangement is made along a line of descending symbolic 
significance and what is indicated by this sense of hierarchy is that the class origin of different 
historical agents plays a decisive role in determining the symbolic significance of different 
conflicts and historical events. Third, as closely related to the first point, it is also implied in 
these words, that the nation was born as a salvation, a redemption of what had gone wrong. 
Indeed, it takes no less than the ultimately sacred mission as “the people’s liberation” and “the 

 

130

national independence and the freedom and well-being of the people” to justify the tremendous 
human sacrifice that had to be paid for such a salvation. 

If the founding myth of the new nation is only partially implied in this inscription, it is 
put straightforward in the opening speech given by Chairman Mao Zedong at the First Plenary 
Session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference held on Sept. 21, 1949. The 
speech was selected as the text of the first lesson in the Chinese textbook for Third Grade Junior 
High student, which serves to testify, though in a trivial way, the ultimate importance of the 
document. Indeed, given at a historic moment immediately preceding the inauguration ceremony 
of the new state, or the symbolic birth of the People’s Republic of China, the speech not only 
composes part of the grand narrative of the nation, it actually performs the function of actively 
calling the new nation into being. 

In this speech, Mao drafted an authoritative narrative that tells where the new nation 

came from and where it is destined to go. In one of the most pithy paragraphs, Mao locates the 
symbolic birth of the new nation into a world-historical framework and thereby invokes a sense 
of sacred mission and millennial salvation. He starts with “we share among us a common 
understanding that what we have achieved will go down in the history of mankind118”, and 
continues with perhaps one of the most symbolically empowering sentence that still resonate in 
today’s China: “the Chinese people, comprising one quarter of humanity, have now stood up!” In 
the following sentences, Mao elaborates on the fundamental transformation that the nation had 
gone through and the historical trajectory that leads up to such a redemptive moment. It goes:  

 
The Chinese have always been a great, courageous and industrious nation; it is only in 
modern times that they have fallen behind. And that was due entirely to oppression and 
exploitation by foreign imperialism and domestic reactionary governments. For over a 
century our forefathers never stopped waging unyielding struggles against domestic and 
foreign oppressors, including the Revolution of 1911 led by Dr. Sun Yat-sen, our great 
forerunner in the Chinese revolution. Our forefathers enjoined us to carry out their 
unfulfilled will. And we have acted accordingly. We have closed our ranks and defeated 
both domestic and foreign oppressors through the People's War of Liberation and the 
great people's revolution, and now we are proclaiming the founding of the People's 
Republic of China…Ours will no longer be a nation subject to insult and humiliation. We 
have stood up119.  
According to this narrative, the new state is first and foremost a millennial salvation for 
Chinese people, a radical rectification of what had gone horribly wrong. What is presented is an 
archetypical progressive narrative based upon a teleological perspective, where good and 
innocent people, no matter how badly they had been hurt and exploited, and how hard and 
prolonged they had to fight for their emancipation, would eventually triumph over the anguish 
and redeem the wrongs and injuries they had to suffer for long. Here, the founding of the new 
nation, which represents the redemptive moment, is personified into a human action, a physical 
                                                 
118 Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1960. Chinese (Textbook for Junior 
High School). Book No.5. Hangzhou: People’s Education Publishing House in Zhejiang. P.4. Translated by the 
author. 
119 The original text could be found in the Chinese text book for Junior High School students in 1960. Editorial 
Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1960. Chinese (Textbook for Junior High 
School). Book No.5. Hangzhou: People’s Education Publishing House in Zhejiang. P.4. And the English translation 
is quoted from the following website: http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-works/volume-
5/mswv5_01.htm 

 

131

posture that conveys the transcendental leap from a state of subjugation and humiliation towards 
an empowering stance that indicates a sense of dignity and equity. It is exactly through such a 
transcendental leap that the darkness of the ‘old and bad’ world can be obliterated by the bright 
light of a new world which promises a different and consequently much better future.  

Obviously, all progressive narrative entails a traumatic representation of the past, the 

negative point from which the transcendental leap to the positive can be made. It is therefore not 
hard to notice that necessary elements of a traumatic narrative could be found in both the 
aforementioned documents, and particularly in Mao’s opening speech, where he explicitly 
identified the horrendous predicament that the nation had been suffering and the perpetrators 
who had inflicted such wounds were explicitly identified. In the preceding paragraphs to the one 
I just quoted, he traces the historical trajectory of the Political Consultative Conference, and by 
pointing out how the results of the first attempt of such a conference, held three years ago, were 
“sabotaged by Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang and its accomplices” 120, unambiguously 
designates the camp of chief enemies that the Chinese people must fight against, “imperialism, 
feudalism, bureaucrat-capitalism and their general representative, the reactionary Kuomintang 
government”121. The profound lesson that people must learn from that first attempt, Mao 
concludes, is that “there is absolutely no room for compromise with Chiang Kai-shek's 
Kuomintang, the running dog of imperialism, and its accomplices -- overthrow these enemies or 
be oppressed and slaughtered by them, either one or the other, there is no other choice.122” In this 
brief statement, Mao firmly built the fact that the fight against the three huge camps of enemies 
and their general agent KMT is a battle of life and death for Chinese people, a battle that is not 
only profoundly and thoroughly justified but a battle that must be won. By coding the war 
against the evil-doers as a battle for survival, Mao not only made a powerful argument for 
legitimizing the victory of the people and the building of the new state, but established a 
traumatic representation of the past, where people were oppressed and slaughtered and which 
consequently must be vanquished and transcended. 

The fundamental outline that is sketched out in Mao’s speech, and especially the 
traumatic representation of the past, reverberates in all the discourses and language that 
contribute to the construction of the national collectivity of China in the 1950s and 1960s. 
Because the founding myth of the nation emphasized a fundamental transformation from what is 
old and bad towards what is new and good, the binary code ‘old’ and ‘new’ is made one of the 
most powerful and prevalent codes in Mao’s era and the stark contrast between the sacred ‘new 
society’ and the profane ‘old society’ becomes the perpetual motif in literary works and other 
cultural products. Take articles selected into the Chinese textbooks for junior high school in the 
50s for examples123. While the texts, altogether 110 pieces of them, were sampled from a wide 
variety of literary works, including news story, memoirs, poems, dramas, novels, classic works, 
etc, with the exception of a few124, the majority could be easily put into five categories, each, 
                                                 
120 The original text could be found in the Chinese text book for Junior High School students in 1960. Editorial 
Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1960. Chinese (Textbook for Junior High 
School). Book No.5. Hangzhou: People’s Education Publishing House in Zhejiang. P.2-3. And the English 
translation is quoted from the following website: http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/mao/selected-
works/volume-5/mswv5_01.htm 
121 Ibid 
122 ibid 
123 These include Chinese Textbook for Junior High School, book no. 1 to no. 6, published by People’s Education 
Publishing House in 1954.  
124  

 

132

though slightly different in their way of relevance, is equally entrenched in the binary code of the 
‘old’ and the ‘new’.  

Some texts, represented mostly by pieces selected from contemporaneous news reports 
such as ‘I Love New Beijing’, and ‘New Masters of the Grassland’, are straightforward odes to 
the new society. Almost invariably, at least parts of these pieces would be dedicated to depicting 
and condemning how miserable life used to be in the old time, in addition to extolling how 
excellent and wonderful the new life is nowadays. Some texts, mainly comprised of memoirs, 
biographies of famous social figures from the old society and novels written before 1949, were 
selected primarily for the strength and depth they revealed in exposing the darkness and 
inhumanity of the old social system. Representative pieces in this category include Lu Xun’s 
most famous piece ‘Hometown’, ‘the Diary of a Mad Man’ and ‘Stories of My Mother’ written 
by Zhu De, all vividly and poignantly depicting how poor ordinary people had suffered before 
1949. Some texts, usually selected widely from contemporaneous news coverage and novels 
written by writers under the leadership of CCP and published after 1949, deal directly with the 
transcendental leap from the past to the present. Many of articles of this category, such as ‘The 
Land’, ‘Our First Harvest’, ‘Peasant Sanhei and his Land’, were selected from novels that write 
about the land reform campaigns carried out under the leadership of CCP during various times. 
Tracing the tortuous way along which poor peasants eventually won the ownership of their land, 
the theme of these works is to highlight the stark contrast between life of the peasants before and 
after their ultimate emancipation, and thereby demonstrate how happy life is today in comparison 
with the pain of yesterday. The fourth category, comprised of articles that tell stories and 
biographies of revolutionary role models including heroes on the battlefield, communist martyrs, 
and socialist model workers and peasants, may appear less explicit in their relevance to the 
construction of the binary code between the old and the new. But it is not a coincident that all the 
heroes in these stories, as represented by those in ‘Heroin Grown up in the Battle’ and ‘A Soldier 
Like This-Memorizing People’s Hero He Daqing’, were depicted as coming originally from poor 
peasants families and having an extremely harsh and deprived life. In fact, their agonies and 
grievances under the oppression and exploitation of the old ruling class were usually given quite 
long descriptions so that the evilness of the old society becomes the very motive upon which 
they participate in the revolution and grow up to be staunch communist fighters. The fifth 
category, which may appear rather exotic, is composed of texts selected from novels and stories 
from other socialist countries like the former Soviet Union and Hungary. These texts, 
represented by ‘A Conversation between Charcoals’, ‘Driving Away Poverty’, demonstrate how 
superior the socialist system is to the old feudal or capitalist system, how the ‘new’ society has 
brought liberation and happiness for the people there, and thereby showcase the universality of 
the sacredness of the ‘new’ and serve to bulwark the construction of the binary code from a 
totally different yet powerful perspective.  

This brief survey over the Chinese textbooks not only demonstrates how universally the 

narrative construction of the national collectivity is carried out via two opposite means, the 
positive construction that eulogizes the ‘new society’, and the negative construction that 
condemns the old one, it also reveals that the remembrance of the ‘old’ is ubiquitous and made 
the very base upon which the legitimacy of the ‘new’ is being built.  In fact, the negative 
construction of the profane, almost always predominates over the establishment of the sacred, 
and the ‘old society’ as a signifier always assumes a much greater symbolic significance than the 
new one.  

 

133

Indeed, there can not be any other signifier than old china, or more frequently the old 
society, that is more prevalently and firmly established as the profane signifier that denotes 
everything that had gone horribly wrong before 1949. In an article selected as part of the Chinese 
textbook for Junior High students, for instance, the author, to justify people’s struggle for 
liberation and eulogize the noble sacrifice of countless martyrs, defines the ‘old society’ as a 
place where the only possible option left for human beings is to “exploit and subjugate each 
other” and it must therefore be characterized by “tens of thousands of evils”125. In the same vein, 
the horrible old society is so unfailingly portrayed in a series of speech genres, as demonstrated 
in Alexander and Gao’s article on the failed trauma of Nanking Massacre, that it becomes 
difficult to imagine the old society without evoking the iconic images that these phrases 
crystallize. For instance, Sang quan ru guo, one of such phrases which literally means “losing the 
sovereignty and mortifying the nation,” communicates the collective trauma induced by the 
series of unequal treaties that China was forced to sign under the threat of more violent 
aggression. Shui shen huo re and min buy liao sheng – respectively “in deep water and burning 
fire” and “there was no way for people to make a living” – figuratively evoked the inexpressible 
pain suffered by ordinary people under the stifling oppression of the “Three Big Mountains,” 
imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism, suggesting that they were “constantly 
drowned in the depth of the water, and burned in heat of fire.”  

In case the horrendous nature of the old society has not been fully illustrated, in another 

text selected in the senior high school textbook, a short story written by Lu Xun, the most 
famous left-wing writer in early 20th century, it was indicated that the entire history of the ‘old 
society’ was being written with the language of cannibalism. The paranoid protagonist of the 
short story, who kept a diary daily, recorded faithfully how he gradually decodes one secret 
message from the behavior of people around him, that they “were one band, all eaters of human 
flesh” and eventually realized that because “I too am a man, they want to eat me!” Being 
extremely frightened and bewildered, the protagonist attempted to find why this is the case from 
a book, which serves a metonymy for the history of the old society, but only found “the whole 
book being filled with the two words—"Eat people."” It becomes quite obvious here that the use 
of the figurative language that indicates cannibalism deepened the weighting of the evil.  

To certain extent, the old society starts to assume an all-encompassing and absolute status 

of a sacred-evil and one telling testimony to this point is that the signifier seems to possess the 
ability to pollute by means of mere association. A good example could be found in the teacher’s 
guide book for music course in junior high school. When talking about how to teach a folksong 
that has been popular among the people since the old era, the guidance book lists several 
pedagogical advices, among which point no. 4 reads:  

 
Tell the students that folksongs composed in the old society reflect the painful suffering 
of the working people, their hatred towards and their struggle against the feudal ruling 
class; at the same time, these songs also demonstrate the invincible optimism of the 
people who, despite their unspeakable plight, are still filled with hope for happiness and a 
brighter future (p.28).  
 

What is particularly interesting is that the editors appear to be apologetic for including folksongs 
into the music textbook in the first place. In pedagogical advices, no. 1,3 and 5, the editors are 
                                                 
125 Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1960. Chinese (Textbook for Junior 
High School). Book No.5. Hangzhou: People’s Education Publishing House in Zhejiang. P. 9. 

 

134

again eager to justify why folksongs that are composed “in the old era” should be known and 
learnt by the students at all. For instance, in bullet point no. 1 the editors kept saying that 
folksongs, because of their “profound ideas, their rich expressiveness and their authentic 
emotionality”, are “extremely beneficial teaching materials” (p. 28); in no. 3, it is emphasized 
that folksongs are created collectively by the proletarian people and therefore are the 
crystallization of the wisdom and talents of the mass people over time (p. 28). It is not hard to 
notice here that folksongs are deemed as something not sacred enough to be included into 
textbooks, mainly because of its origin which is rooted in “the old society”, therefore, to purify 
folksongs and to diminish its profanity derived from “the past”, a universal and transcendent 
symbol of sacredness in communist culture, “the mass people”, must be employed: the folksongs 
can not be bad even if they came into being in the old society, for they were after all created by 
the sacred proletarian people.  
The Genre of ‘Remembering the Bitterness’ and the Cultural Trauma of ‘Old Society’ 

The predicament and suffering brought by the old society would remain impersonal and 

abstract, and the evilness of the enemies, no matter how the coding has been weighted, 
intangible, if there is no symbolic identification to bridge the temporal and psychological gap 
between the new era and the old one. Such a symbolic extension and emotional identification 
was successfully achieved among the public in Mao’s China because the traumatic representation 
of the past was extensively and consistently dramatized in various types of cultural products. In 
fact, a new literary genre was created for such purpose, which is known as ‘Yi Ku Si Tian’, or 
literally, ‘appreciating the sweetness of today by remembering the bitterness of the past’.  

A prototype of such genre could be found in the lyric of a song titled “The Past Story of 

Mum”. Selected in the music textbook for elementary school students, the melodious song is still 
popular among young kids of today. It begins with the usual building of a romantic ambience 
which also serves to depict a general picture that implies the better quality of life made possible 
in the new society:  

 
The moon is moving through the white clouds that take the shape of beautiful lotus,  
Joyful songs flow with the gentle evening breeze. 
We sat next to the hill of millets that piles high, 
Listening to the story told by mum about the past.  
 
Then, the traumatic past that mum had experienced was reconstructed, recounting how 
mum, a landless and impoverished peasant, had suffered unspeakable misery at the hand of the 
avaricious landlords. The song goes on like: 

 
At that time, Mum was landless and all she has was her hands and labor, 
Toiling in the field of the landlord, the only food she could get was wild herbs and husks 
The blizzard of the harsh winter was howling like wolves, yet mum had barely anything 
on except for her pieces of rug. 
She fainted at the side of the road out of hunger and coldness, being on her way to sew a 
fur robe for the landlord’s wife. 
Only through such a tortuous ordeal did mum eventually hail the happiness of today. 
 
Two salient features stand out from this lyric that are also characteristic of other works of 

this genre. First, the painful experience that one suffers in the old society is successfully 

 

135

personalized because the victim takes the image of one’s most intimate family member, which 
undoubtedly makes a psychological identification much easier. Usually, works of this genre 
adopt the form of memoirs, biography or autobiography, in which the protagonist recounts the 
story with first person perspective and recalls the unbearable torment and grief that she had 
experienced personally in the old society. The poignant and detailed recreation of the life story of 
a specific victim not only lends much authenticity and truthfulness to the story, but also 
facilitates a symbolic identification with the protagonist. 

Second, it can not be missed that the major conflict as narrated in the lyric is explicitly 

developed along a class line where the victim, the mum, represents the impoverished proletarian 
class, and the perpetrator, the landlord, obviously serves as a metonymy for all the exploitative 
class that by definition also include the capitalists. This highlights the fact that the profanity of 
the ‘old society’ is principally constructed via the dramatic struggle and opposition between class 
enemies and it is thereby inseparably coupled with the trauma of class struggle. In fact, the 
following discussion would testify in a most compelling way that the genre of ‘appreciating the 
sweetness of today by remembering the bitterness of the past’ plays a crucial role in building the 
trauma drama of class struggle, which in turn becomes an essential component in the overall 
traumatic representation of the old society.  

Another illuminating example of the genre (hereafter referred to as ‘remembering the 

bitterness’) could be found in the Chinese textbooks for school kids in 1960s, where many such 
articles or literary works were selected. In fact, in the Chinese textbook published in 1964, at 
least three pieces of such works can be found in each of the two books to be taught to second 
year students in junior high school. Among these texts, one article titled ‘A New Watch’ is again 
very informative of the basic format and structure commonly used in this genre. As with the 
lyric, the story also starts with a depiction of the happiness that the entire family enjoyed today, 
when the protagonist bought a new watch for his daughter. Then, predictably, the protagonist 
started to testify how such an apparently easy purchase was completely unimaginable for his 
family 20 years ago. The painful memories are long and replete with iconic images that evoke 
similar visualization resonated with that narrated in the lyric. In one of the most salient images, 
for instance, the protagonist recalls the scene he witnessed at the entrance of a watch store from a 
distance. He was enraged to find that “only those who had a private rickshaw or who came in 
cars, only those capitalists and the wives of bureaucrats who wear silks ever went into the shop, 
and never ever have I seen any single worker or peasant went in there.126” Most revealing of the 
genre, this image powerfully visualizes the binary opposition across the deep trench of class 
between the allied perpetrators and the joined victims, both of whom are essential to the narrative 
construction of not only the trauma of class struggle, but also the profanity of the old society.  

However, what differentiates the story from the lyric and makes it somehow more 
enlightening, is the last paragraph where the protagonist, after recounting the past torment, 
exclaimed to his daughter with passion: “What a society that was! What a miserable life! We 
must inscribe them line by line upon our heart! Even when we are one-hundred years old, when 
we are enjoying a happiness that is equivalent to paradise, we must not let these marks erode!127” 
What is being conveyed in this paragraph adds another significant symbolic dimension to 

the genre of ‘remembering the bitterness’. It shows that though the past, or the ‘old society’, as 
an evil has already been triumphantly conquered, its symbolic significance is not only not 
                                                 
126 Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1964. Chinese (Textbook for Junior 
High School, newly edited in 1964). Book No.4. Beijing: People’s Education Publishing House. P. 83. 
127 Ibid 

 

136

diminished but strengthened, because the sacredness of the new society can not be firmly 
established or fully appreciated but through a perpetual symbolic recreation of the ‘bitterness of 
the past’. In fact, it is only through a constant cycle of reconstruction and remembering that the 
darkness of the old evils who feed on the victimization and suffering of the proletarian people, 
could be successfully built, without which, the positive image of socialist beings that become the 
true master of the ‘new society’ can not possibly come into being.  
 
Four Genealogies and the Collective Trauma of Class Struggle 
 

By the beginning of 1960s, the genre of ‘remembering the bitterness’ had surged with 
such momentum that from the year 1960 on, in the General Catalogue of Publication compiled 
by the central government, under the category of Feature Stories, Profiles and Revolutionary 
memoirs, there appeared a new column named ‘Four Genealogies’, namely, genealogy of 
factories, of PLA, of people’s communes, of village, and etc (usually with the additional one of 
family), which are exclusively composed of the ‘bitterness’ works published nationwide over 
any one specific year. In the prologue of one of the representative book series under this column 
in 1964128, the editors explain why they chose the new terminology ‘Genealogy’, which could 
also be taken as part of the justification of the formation and surge of this literary type from the 
1960s throughout to the Cultural Revolution:  

 
Since ancient time, having a ‘genealogy’ has been the privilege of the reactionary ruling 
class, who made use of it to strengthen its own rule and deceive the mass people. 
However, when our New China was established like the breaking of a spring thunder, 
history turned a new page from that moment on, and off with the old page was the ugly 
genealogy of the ruling class. From now on, under the leadership of CCP, we, the 
revolutionary people also have the privilege to record our own struggling experience, to 
write the genealogy of proletarians and to paint the most beautiful layout of our future 
(V1, 2; V2, 2).  
 
The choice of the new term here conveys a significant message, that genealogy cannot be 

the records of just anyone’s history, it must be the collective memories of the ‘proletarian’ 
people129. And by such a shift in terminology, the class boundary that characterizes all the 
‘bitterness’ works seems to be more intensified, and the focus upon class struggle fiercely 
stressed.  
                                                 
128 This refers to an article collection titled “Red Genealogies”, which was published by the Xin Hua Daily Press in 
1964 and composed of 12 booklets and two volumes of selected articles. The series was chosen first and foremost 
because the publisher was very prestigious which guarantees a wide circulation among readers; secondly, and 
equally important, the series cover all the four (though most of the time it refers to five) types of genealogies and 
therefore in itself forms an independent system that could offer us a more complete view of the genre. Owing to lack 
of source, I could only make access to three of the 12 booklets published in this series, but fortunately, the two big 
volumes of selected articles actually covered many of the articles in other booklets and thus makes the data more 
complete. 
129 Such a definition bears extremely consequential repercussions upon the construction of grand narrative of the 
nation as well as on the representation and remembrance of any specific period of history, including, the War of 
Resistance against Japan that I would discuss later, because it stringently excludes from the agencies of history 
members of classes other than the proletarian.  

 

137

Reading through stories with the label of ‘Genealogy’, it is not hard to notice that while 

they share all the features that characterize other ‘bitterness’ works, they also systematically 
reveal certain special patterns that are subtly yet significantly distinct from the other works, 
besides their heightened fixation upon class and class struggle. Taking the previously mentioned 
book series ‘The Red Genealogy’ for instance, like other works in the ‘remembering the 
bitterness’ genre, this series is composed of a collection of memoirs written by ordinary working 
people, recalling how miserable their life used to be under the rule of the reactionary forces 
before the liberation. What makes this series of ‘genealogy’ distinguished from other ‘bitterness’ 
works though, is that it seems more explicit and eager in creating a symbolic identification and 
emotional extension among the readers. And it attempted to achieve this goal through two 
means. One is that the protagonists in the stories seem to be intentionally chosen so that they 
could represent poor people from all walks of life, including peasants, factory workers, 
technicians, craftsmen, elementary school teachers, nurses, chefs etc, and of all ages and genders. 
Such an arrangement of course serves to better illustrate how proletarian people, no matter what 
hey did and who they were, can not escape the tragic fate of being oppressed and exploited in the 
old society, but it would also facilitate the symbolic identification of current people, each of 
whom could find in these victims, in a concrete and personalized way, either their own painful 
memories, or the gloomy fate they were likely to suffer if they had the misfortune to be born into 
the old society.  

Second, following each memoir, there is an editor’s words section, summarizing the 

‘morals’ that the readers are supposed to learn. As articulated in the prologue of the volume, the 
editors encouraged the readers to identify with ‘those who had gong through the great 
transformation of our nation, because for these people, the anguish of being exploited, oppressed, 
insulted and discriminated against in old China, the excruciating memories of being undulated in 
pain and torment, are like a scar of whip on their back and a mark of burn on their chest; they 
will never be able to forget about it.’(4) And so must we, those who had the fortune to live in the 
happy new China, the editors continued, ‘never forget the agony of class oppression, the sacrifice 
made during the revolution and the history of class struggle’ (2), because ‘to forget is the 
equivalent of betrayal’ (2). 

The endeavor to reach out for breadth of audience and for creating a symbolic collectivity 
is accompanied on the other hand by earnest attempts to ‘deepen the evilness’ of the perpetrators, 
to make the ‘wound’ upon the collectivity more painful and the ‘scar’ on the memory indelible. 
Indeed, another feature that distinguishes the ‘genealogy’ stories from other ‘bitterness’ works 
seems to be that they were much more articulate and focused upon constructing a trauma-drama 
for the proletarian collectivity, the process of which entails two building blocks.  

One is to showcase the incredibly broad extent and the tremendous volume of the 

sufferings of the people, and this was successfully achieved with the sheer huge number of 
stories and memoirs published under the column of genealogy in the 1960s130, all basically 
adopting the same framework of plot and narrative development. In the prologues, epilogues or 
editor’s words of the genealogy publications, the editors all seem to be focused upon building the 
‘universality’ or the ‘ubiquity’ of the distresses and afflictions experienced by the proletarian 
class in its entirety. They would not only justify the production of their own collections by 
emphasizing how ‘class grievances are just endless to speak’, as an editor acknowledged in the 
epilogue in one booklet that  (V6, 40), but also apologize for being able to present only such a 
tiny parts of all the ‘representative cases’. Indeed, the most frequently quoted Chinese idioms in 
                                                 
130  

 

138

these texts is perhaps the term, “Qing Zhu Nan Shu”, which literally means that ‘(the horrendous 
agonies inflicted on us) are so tremendous and so profound, that even if all the bamboos 
(bamboo is the material the ancient Chinese used to write stuff on, like paper of today) in the 
world are used out, we still could not finish writing them.’ The overwhelming amount of 
publicity given to the tragic experiences of poor people in the old society not only magnified the 
sufferings of individuals and increases the enormity of the evil doings of the perpetrators, but 
elevated traumas that would have remained in the privacy of personal memories onto a public 
sphere, so that the pain and agony of a worker or a peasant became the sufferings of an entire 
collectivity. In fact, the universality of the agony of proletarian people seemed so well 
established that it became inseparably interweaved with the definition of the collective identity 
of the class; in other words, to have gone through unspeakable agony and suffered at the hands of 
demonic enemies is almost a necessary precondition upon which one claims his membership into 
the proletarian class and a common denominator he shares with his class brothers and sisters.  

The second building block involves both the unequivocal identification of the victims, the 

perpetrators and the nature of the trauma, and heightening the weighting of all the symbolic 
codes and deepening the emotional involvements of the audience. Browsing over the titles of the 
publication under the column of ‘Four Genealogies’ from 1960 to 1965, one would be stricken 
by how dramatically gory and sentimental language is used to present a general images that is 
tinted with a touch of violence and blood. Take the afore-mentioned collection of ‘Red 
Genealogy’ again as a revealing example. The titles, or subtitles, of the memoirs in this 
collection, echoing the general trend, are full of words and expressions that are capable of 
reenacting violent visual images that would heighten the level of people’s alertness and 
emotional response. In one article titled “the Surge of Indignation Avenged the Feud of the 
Fishers’ Family’, for instance, the first section was subtitled “the Yangtse River was a River of 
Blood and Tears”; in another article titled “the Killing Ground of the Imperialists” (V3(cid:31)21), the 
title of a section reads “A Drop of Milk Was Produced with a Drop of Blood of the Workers 
Before the Liberation”. The extensive use of words like ‘feud’, ‘hatred’, ‘enmity’, ‘blood’, 
‘tears’, ‘killing’ here alert the readers that what await them in these stories are not simply some 
‘ordinary’ offense or ‘usual’ incidents of oppression or exploitations, but tragedies of bigger 
enormity, situations where people’s blood was spilled. In other words, the class trauma depicted 
here is an issue of life and death and definitely nothing less.  

In fact, just as these titles indicate, what was being shown in all the genealogy stories is 

‘a debt of blood that goes as deep as the ocean’ (a title of one of the genealogy publication in 
1963), a collective trauma of the proletarian people who, according to these stories, had not only 
been oppressed, starved, tortured, persecuted, maltreated, insulted, humiliated, trampled upon, 
and relentlessly exploited, but also murdered, massacred, and carnally destroyed. That there must 
be at least one victim whose life was deprived by various evil perpetrators seem to be rule for 
every genealogy story. One very representative piece comes from the memoir of a nurse, titled 
‘From a Slave to a Fighter in White Dress’, in which she recalled the tragic fate that her young 
female colleagues fell to before 1949: one of them being raped by a patient who was a high-rank 
government official, one being forced to marry a rich businessman as his concubine, and another 
committed suicide soon after being sold to a brothel by her rogue husband. ’And in case this is 
not adequate to make things traumatic, she continues to expose more horrendous details she 
witnessed in the practice of the hospital, that while hospitals in old time refused to treat poor 
patients because the latter can not afford the prohibitive expenses, some of them were taken in on 
purpose because the hypocritical medical ‘experts’ wanted to use these patients for experimental 

 

139

purposes and many of them were thus killed during the process of being treated (V2, 93). To 
conclude this traumatic portrayal of the suffering of poor people in the old society, the author 
exasperated “how many young and vigorous lives have been ruined by this savage social 
system!’ (V2, 93) and asked with indignation “Could this be a human world at all?” (92).  

In anther memoir written by a peasant, he recalled the destitute and agonizing life his 

family suffered when he was a child and then told a heart-breaking story of how his family was 
ruined after a fatal accident stroke. It was said that he was burned severely while serving as a 
tenant in the landlord’s household, whom he gave the nickname of ‘the Living Yanluo’(or yama, 
the god in Chinese legend who was in charge of hell and who is famous for being extremely 
merciless, cruel and brutal and taking pleasure in inflicting pain upon people), and the landlord 
refused to lend him any money for medical treatment, leaving him to die. Deprived of any means 
of living, yet anxious to save their kid, his parents, who were already in their 60s, went out 
begging and his father was killed in a snowstorm out of hunger and coldness and his mum soon 
died because of sorrow and physical weakness. For the author, this tragedy not only left an 
indelible scar on his life but remained a debt of blood that must be avenged, as he claimed with a 
clutched teeth that  “Two of my most beloved family members died at his hands and the 
bloodstain would be forever fresh.’ (V1 113). 

‘Death’ and ‘blood’ obviously functions as the transcendental mechanisms through which 
common sad stories about how good people suffer are elevated to a more dramatic and traumatic 
level where innocent and sacred people are being slaughtered. Through this transcendental 
mechanism the nature of the trauma and the perpetration was endowed with a much graver 
symbolic weight. For instance, it is very common for the authors in these memoirs to deny the 
humanness of the old society, as they frequently used terms like ‘hell in human world’(V3 21), 
‘killing ground’(cid:31)V3,21), ‘slaughterhouse’ to describe the world they used to live in. Words and 
expressions associated with ‘killing’, ‘murdering’, ‘slaughtering’, were also frequently employed 
figuratively in various contexts to indicate how bad the exploitation and oppression had been. 
For instance, a prohibitive expense that denies the poor people of their basic substances would be 
described as ‘a price that is capable of killing’ (v1 20), a usury is called ‘a murderous debt that 
can not be cleared even if one sells one’s entire family’ (v4, 3), and a particularly exploitative 
business owner would be portrayed as “ the one who slaughters without even having to use a 
knife!” (v4, 24). And not unusually, like in Luxun’s novel that I mentioned previously, 
‘cannibal’ or ‘human-eating’ is used as the qualifying words that defines the ultimate evil nature 
of the perpetration inflicted upon the proletarian people. In a story, when the author told how the 
imperialist troops were sent to crack down a strike held by factory workers and many workers 
were shot to death as a result, he cried out indignantly: “the imperialists once again exhibited 
their true color of being cannibals!” (v3, 31) In an epilogue, the editor claimed that “capitalist 
class eat human flesh without even spitting out the bones!” (v6, 40) 

The grim, hellish image of the perpetration is perfectly matched by the portrayal of 

perpetrators who take different yet equally dreadful forms in various contexts. Many times the 
perpetrators were compared to marauding predators in animals. For instance, one of the 
frequently quoted Chinese idioms in genealogy stories is ‘all the crows in the world are as dark 
as each other’, meaning that evil forces around the world are as bad as each other and they join 
together to bully poor people around (v1 67, 100, 104; v2, 24). But while this idiom could 
convey the ubiquity of the evil forces, crows are obviously too gentle and feeble to embody the 
real brutality and rapacity of the class enemies, and thus huge-size and cannibal beasts were 
more often employed. To expose the equally savage nature of all oppressors, for example, it was 

 

140

rhetorically asked in one article that ‘can you find a tiger in the world that does not eat human 
beings?’ (v1, 67). In another memoir, the author compared the reactionary Nationalist 
government to “beasts that eat human fleshes without even spitting out the bones” (v2, 24) and 
his own painful sufferings at the hands of different enemies as ‘once out of the mouth of the 
tigers, right into the dens of the wolves’ (v2, 3). In addition to cannibal beasts, venomous 
animals were also used to depict the virulence and malice of the evil forces in the old society. 
For instance, an actress grieved in her memoir that ‘in the old society, the thugs, rogues and 
gangs were harassing me as venomous bees’ (v2, 72); another author, recalling how the factory 
owners cracked down on workers’ strike with violence, claimed with anger that “venomous 
snakes will bite in desperation before taking in their last breath” (v3, 41).  

Yet, it seems that even the most deadly and predatory beasts can not hold up to the 

comparison with the evilness of the landlords and capitalists class and therefore more widely 
adopted than the figuration of animals is the comparison of class enemies to the ultimate 
embodiment of cruelty and profanity in traditional Chinese culture. One most frequently 
employed symbol is “Yao Mo”, the Chinese words for devils and fiends, as shown by a subtitle 
in one article in volume 3, “the reactionary forces are a group of devils and fiends who were 
stinking with the odor of blood” (v3, 38). Another group of popular symbols could be found in 
the nicknames that local peasants attributed to particularly rapacious landlords. One particularly 
devilish landlord in a village, as the aforementioned genealogy stories showed, was called by the 
local peasants “Yan Luo in human world” (v1, 67) meaning the god of Yama, or the god in 
Chinese legend who was in charge of hell and who is famous for being extremely merciless, 
cruel and brutal and taking pleasure in inflicting pain upon people. ‘Ba Pi’, which literally means 
the ‘person who strips people’s skin’, is another most frequently employed metonymy typically 
reserved for ‘bad’ landlords who are notoriously rapacious and exploitative.  

‘Remembering the bitterness’ genre, with the surge of Genealogy stories and publication 

as its climax, offers a very efficient mechanism through which the trauma-drama of class 
struggle was successfully built in Mao’s China. The huge-scale distribution and the wide 
popularity of the genre elevated individual tragedies onto the platform of a collectivity and 
brought the issues into the center of public discourse. Through the witness-perspective memoir 
genre, perpetrators and victims were concretely personalized, facilitating the symbolic 
identification of the audience. The dramatic plot setting, which unfailingly involves the sacrifice 
of lives and spill of blood, and the heightened weighting of the symbolic codes attributed to the 
nature of the sufferings and the enemies, both contributed powerfully to the recreation of the 
traumatic experiences of suffering and agony of the victims and the production of a wide 
emotional extension among the readers. Through the trauma drama thus constructed, through a 
process of recreation and identification, the audience either ‘relived’ the past, ‘redefined’ it as 
traumatic, or they would, especially for the younger generations, have the chance to be 
‘traumatized’ by ‘experiencing’ and ‘sharing’ the hellish life of victims of the past. The dairy of 
the a young PLA solider, Lei Feng, a role model for all the youngsters in the 1960s and 
throughout to early 1990s, as selected in the Chinese textbook in the 1960s, demonstrates how 
powerful the trauma drama was in its impact among the public. In one piece of his diary, Lei was 
talking about the emotion he experienced after reading some ‘bitterness’ works: “How 
profoundly I could understood their sufferings and how indignant and aggrieved I felt when I 
read their stories! (quote?) I too was born in a poor peasant family and had been suffering 
unspeakably in the old society, just like them!” And it is very clear that such a close emotional 
and symbolic identification plays an essential role in building a collective identity based on class, 

 

141

as Lei continues to express how he was determined to dedicate himself to the proletarian class: “I 
am always ready to sacrifice everything of mine, including my life for the interests of the party 
and our class.” (p.73) 
 
The Trauma-Drama of Class Struggle 
 

What is extraordinary about the trauma-drama of the old society and class struggle 

constructed in Mao’s China is that the drama was not only written and read, but also performed 
and participated by real people on a daily basis. Since early 1950s, various nation-wide 
campaigns were carried out consecutively, that not only necessitates but also facilitates struggle 
meetings and other types of rituals being enacted at all levels up from the local communities 
(notes?). Among all the rituals, ‘speaking the bitterness’ is perhaps the most universally adopted 
and also exerts the most profound and broad impact on people. Emerging first in the first Land 
Reform Campaign as a form of struggle for CCP to mobilize the populace and to create a 
solidarity that is defined and strengthened by class boundary, ‘speaking the bitterness’ offers an 
efficient way where the ‘drama’ could be literally put on a show and the ‘bitterness’ got 
reenacted on a ‘stage’. In other words, ‘speaking the bitterness’ is to certain extent the 
performative embodiment of the literary genre, ‘remembering the bitterness’; only that it is much 
more powerful and compelling than the latter, as it rises beyond the cognitive argument and 
demands the acute physical presence, emotional involvement and performative action. 

To observe how the ritual works and to understand its powerful impact on participants, 

we now turn to works that actually record the proceedings of such a ritual and a text titled 
‘Struggling Han Lao Liu’, found in the Chinese textbook for junior high students in the 1960s 
proves very illuminating. The chapter was selected from a novel very well received in the 1950s 
and depicts a ‘speaking the bitterness’ meeting that occurred in a small village in the North-east 
region during the land reform movement led by the communist party in late 1940s. As a typical 
work of ‘remembering the bitterness’ genre, this chapter contains an extremely interesting co-
presence of double ‘bitterness’ that is particularly enlightening to my research here. On the one 
hand, belonging to the genre of ‘remembering the bitterness’ makes the chapter a part of the 
general narrative building process of the trauma drama; on the other hand, with its substances 
relating the ritual process of ‘speaking bitterness’, it opens a live window to the historical 
moment where a trauma drama was being built on the local level.  

What becomes salient from the very beginning of the article is the absolute coding and 
weighting of the chief antagonist, the target of the struggle, landlord Han. It was described that 
even before the ritual starts, women and kids had started to sing a folk Yang Ge song that they 
improvised on the spot. The lyric goes: “Thousands of years of hatred, and Tens of thousands of 
years of grievance (scores), can only be solved when the communist party comes! Han Laoliu, 
Han Laoliu, the people today will cut you to pieces!” The rancorous sense of animosity 
illustrated in the lyric made it lucid that the landlord had not only been coded as someone evil, 
but his evilness has been weighted to such a level that he deserves to be killed in a most 
relentless way.  

When the meeting begins, the landlord was brought to the center of the courtyard where a 

certain kind of stage was set for the ‘struggle’, and one by one, people who felt that they had 
been wronged, oppressed or persecuted by the landlord came up to the stage to give a public 
testimony to the unforgivable sins of the evil doer. The ritual starts, with the first figure, a young 
man stepping onto the central stage. He claimed that Han had attempted to force him to be a 

 

142

slave worker for the Japanese colonizers and when he refused and ran away, Han retaliated by 
sending his mum into prison who eventually died there. Then the chapter goes: “’I want to take 
revenge for my mum today!’, as Yang San, (the name of the figure) bellowed with anger, people 
around all cried out, “Let’s beat him to death!” and started to push forwards with sticks to the 
center of the courtyard.”  “Their chorus”, it goes on, was like “the thunder of spring roaring in 
the sky” (p.61) 

What can not be missed from the scene is that the ritual of speaking bitterness is also a 
production of a trauma drama, where the tragedy that the victims had to suffer individually and 
privately was dramatized on the stage and publicized to an audience who share with victims their 
pain and distress and their hatred towards the common foe. If the bitter story told by each victim 
comprises one independent act of the drama, the momentum of each act would accumulate and 
eventually reach the climax of the drama when a collective effervescence is achieved and a 
stronger solidarity created among the whole community. Such a dramatic process could be found 
in the final act of the struggle described in the chapter.  

When the last bitterness speaker Widow Zhang finished her story by yelling “Give me 

back my son!”, it was described that “men and women all pushed forwards, crying that they want 
their sons, husbands, fathers, brothers back. And the sounds of weeping, crying, beating and 
cursing all mixed together.” Indeed, the scene was so intense and moving that Xiao Wang, a 
young member of the land reform team who came from outside the village, “kept wiping his 
tears with the back of his hand”.  

It is interesting to note that at this moment, when Xiao Wang emotionally identified with 

the victims of the village, the readers of the chapter would also have relived the trauma drama 
that occurred in the all-evil old society that they may or may not have experienced personally. So 
what we observer here is a dual process that parallel two mechanisms working at two different 
levels, one on the micro level of the local communities, where rituals, physical presence and 
intensified emotions produce a concrete and tangible collective effervescence that bonds 
individuals together into a corporeal entity, the other on the macro level of the wider ‘imagined 
community’, where the powerful textual recreation of a ‘common’ trauma produces widely 
spread symbolic identification and emotional extension among readers who are tightly united by 
both the past anguish that they believed they have shared, and the new proletarian class identity 
that emerges from the collective trauma and made the new China possible.  

 
 
By examining the grand narrative which tells the founding myth of the nation, I argue 

that a collective trauma of the old society and class struggle was successfully constructed which 
plays a critical role in the narrative construction of the new national collectivity. Several 
elements contribute to the solidification of the trauma. First, the profanity of the old society, 
encoded with all the sense of evilness, darkness and profanity, endowed with an absolute 
symbolic polluting power that deepens the coding of everything that is associated with it, is very 
successfully established. Second, the trauma of the past was inseparably interweaved with a 
trauma of class struggle. And via literary genres of ‘remembering the bitterness’, and particularly 
the broad distribution and popularity of ‘genealogy stories’, the trauma was personalized and 
dramatized extensively and consistently in various cultural products. Third, the textual recreation 
of a shared trauma was ‘performed’ and ‘embodied’ by various struggle meetings and rituals that 
exponentially add to the force of impact. Through the construction of a grand national narrative, 
through a constant reproduction of the trauma drama in texts and in rituals, the bitterness and 

 

143

darkness that characterizes the old society was being consciously revisited and relived. This 
perpetual recreation not only forms the solid foundation upon which the legitimacy of the new 
nation is built, but also facilitates the construction of a national collectivity through a symbolic 
identification and spiritual catharsis that can only be experienced via a narrow yet sacred 
salvation from an otherwise extremely traumatic fate.  

 

Remembrance of the War: Absent-minded Commemoration of the War in Public Sphere and Vice 
Chairman Lin’s Commemoration Article 
 

In this powerfully built collective trauma of dark old society and ruthless class struggle, 
what kind of roles did the War of Resistance Against Japan play? How was it represented and 
memorized in the grand narrative of modern China? How did it contribute to the collective 
identity building in the new republic? It is my argument in the following sections that the grand 
narrative of revolution, with the compelling cultural trauma of class struggle at its core, 
preempted and blocked the emergence of the War as a collective trauma in Mao’s China and I 
demonstrate that the process of ‘preemption’ has been worked through two cultural and symbolic 
mechanisms that converged to shape how the War would eventually be narrated and represented 
in the public sphere around the time. First, as I demonstrate in previous sections, the successful 
construction of the collective trauma of class struggle has been achieved with such sweeping 
scales and engrossing depth, that it basically left little symbolic space for the emergence of any 
other powerful cultural trauma which would inevitably compete with the former for symbolic 
resources and media venues; and this is particularly true for cases like the War, that, as I would 
immediately show by the second mechanism, claims an entirely different set of perpetrators, 
victims and nature of sufferings that is not necessarily compatible with the innate logic of the 
former. Second, and perhaps more importantly, the intrinsic logic and force of a collective 
trauma of class struggle rules that the world be defined and structured along a horizontal 
boundary of class and the collective identity be fostered along a line of fraternity that transcend 
any other border posed by gender, races, ethnicities, or nations131. This means that the 
fundamental conflict of the War, basically defined along a vertical boundary of national 
difference, runs contradictory to the predominant horizontal demarcation of the world, and to 
underscore the significance of the War would be at best irrelevant and at worst doing an 
inconvenient disservice to the legitimacy and truthfulness of the trauma of class struggle. The 
compelling force of the trauma of class struggle, therefore, entails that the symbolic significance 
of the War be toned down and that the identification of the enemies be put in an ambiguous light 
so that it would not be blatantly at jar with class lines. To substantiate my arguments, it perhaps 
makes sense to start with observing what happened in the public sphere in 1965, the 20th 
anniversary of the victory in the War.  

Full 20 years after the end of the war, with the benefit of hindsight, one would assume 
that this could be an ideal time for the nation to come to terms with what happened during the 
                                                 
131 Evidences for such entrenched internationalism are ubiquitous. For instance, of the two huge emblazed slogans 
that hung on each side of Chairman Mao’s portrait on Tian’an Men gate, one reads “Long Live the Solidarity of 
People of the World!”, noted that “people” here, like anywhere else in Mao’s China, had a strong connotation of 
proletariat people, or working people. Also noted that the other slogan of the two reads “Long Live the People’s 
Republic of China”. The juxtaposition here unmistakably demonstrates the ultra significance of internationalism and 
the horizontal way of interpreting the world that was so deep-rooted in Chinese society in the 1950s and 1960s. My 
summary and analysis of Chinese textbooks’ contents on page 5 and 6 could also demonstrate how internationalism 
predominates in texts and media.  

 

144

war, who were to blame, how horrendously people had suffered, how to rebuild the life of 
millions whose families and lives had been devastated, and what should be done to prevent 
something so disastrous to happen ever again. In other words, it was good timing to transform 
the profound sense of trauma and loss that still seared on the minds and bodies of millions of 
individuals into an indelible mark upon the entire collectivity, should there be any attempt or 
intention to inscribed a particularly devastating and traumatic war upon the collective memories 
of the nation.   

Yet, such assumption proves to be ultimately counter-factual. A general survey over the 
media coverage and publications in 1965 reveals that none of the necessary elements that might 
contribute to the emergence and construction of a collective trauma based upon the War ever 
appeared in the public sphere. Indeed, not only was there not any attempt to build a traumatic 
collective memory, the institutional commemoration activities convened by the central 
government appeared to be rather limited in quantity and absent-minded in its intention. 
Browsing briefly through the General Catalogue of Publication of 1965132, one would be 
surprised to find that besides two monographs that were listed respectively in the Politics and 
Social Life and Military Columns, and a collection entitled ‘In Commemoration of the 20th 
Anniversary of the Victory in the Great War of Resistance against Japan’ that comprises four 
books133 listed in the News Features and Profile Stories Section in Literature, there was hardly 
any special works published explicitly dedicated to the commemoration of the War134. The lack 
of commemoration works was even more underscored if it is taken into account that right after 
the News Features and Profile Stories Section where the collection was listed, starts the Section 
of Four Genealogies, and to pose a sharp contrast to the four books that were dedicated to the 
commemoration of the War, this section include 109 books whose titles cover six and half pages 
(Catalogue 1965, 127-133). And this is not to take into consideration the several book series 
published under Children’s Literature column, two of which were named ‘Class Struggle Must 
not be Forgotten Series’ and ‘Stories that Can not be Forgotten Series’ (check the other 
publication?) (Catalogue 1965, 510-511).  

Another telling piece of testimony that demonstrates the lack of attention attached to the 
commemoration of the War could be found in ‘ Editorials of the People’s Daily 1965’ compiled 
and published by the People’s Daily Press. Among all the 6 volumes of the collection, there was 
not a single piece dedicated to the commemoration of the War. While this does not mean that 
there was not any commemoration articles or publications at all (indeed, a most important 
commemoration article was first released on the People’s Daily as seen from the following 
discussion), it does very powerfully reveal what little historical significance the commemoration 
and the War had been attributed in the public sphere around that time. The very fact that People’s 
                                                 
132 The columns I observed include History, Politics and Social Life, Military, and the News Features and Profile 
Stories Section in Literature, and Litarature for Children.  
133 The titles of the four books are respectively: the Tunnel War, the Landmine War, the Yanling Team, and the 
Heroic Panjia Valley. Showcasing the mightiness and bravery of the mass people in fighting against the invaders, it 
is quite obvious that these books were complied first and foremost because they could exemplify the People’s War, 
the type of war that represents the best of the military and political thoughts of Chairman Mao, as will be shown in 
the following discussion of Lin Piao’s article.  
134 Quite a few novels were published in 1965 which writes about the War. However, the fact could hardly stand out 
as something noteworthy because these books compose only a tiny part of all the novels published that year, as is the 
case in all the other years, and they were not explicitly dedicated to the commemoration of the War. In the later part 
of this section, when I discuss the texts in the Chinese textbooks, some chapters of these works would be referred to 
because part of them were revised and selected into these textbooks. 

 

145

Daily is the mouthpiece of CCP and editorials on it are usually meant to serve as the guiding 
book for all the provincial governments and local people to comprehend and implement policies 
and lines adopted by the central government, makes such absence more salient and the meaning 
more illuminating.  

While the absence is striking, the contents of what had been published prove more 

rewarding to explore and one of the most significant documents is undoubtedly a 
commemoration article written by Lin Piao, the Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party of China, Vice-Premier of the State Council and concurrently Minister of 
National Defense, namely, the military and political guru whose rank and prestige was only 
second to that of chairman Mao. The title of the article was ‘Long Live the Victory of People’s 
War! In Commemoration of the 20th Anniversary of Victory in the Chinese People’s War of 
Resistance Against Japan.’ It was first released on People’s Daily on September 3rd, 1965 and 
was then quickly compiled and published as a monograph and translated into several foreign 
languages. Because of the author and the venue where it was first published, the symbolic 
significance of the article was beyond doubt. It would be the authoritative version that not only 
sets the overall tone for the commemoration activities but also shapes and tailors the 
interpretation and collective memories of the War among the public. 

The article was composed of 9 sections that could be divided into two parts. The first 6 
sections, ‘The Principal Contradiction in the period of the War of Resistance Against Japan and 
the Line of the CCP’, ‘Correctly Apply the Line and Policy of the United Front’, ‘Rely on the 
Peasants and Establish Rural Base Areas’, ‘Build a People’s Army of a New Type’, ‘Carry out 
the Strategy and Tactics of People’s War’, ‘Adhere to the Policy of Self-reliance’ are mainly 
dedicated to an almost technical discussion on how and why the CCP, leading its revolutionary 
army and the masses of Chinese people, could eventually defeat an enemy that enjoyed extreme 
superiority ‘in both arms and equipment’ (Lin 1965, 2) and win the ‘great war of resistance’. The 
last three sections, ‘The International Significance of Comrade Mao Tse-tung’s Theory of 
People’s War in the International Community’, ‘Defeat the U.S. Imperialists and Its Lackeys by 
People’s War’ and ‘The Khrushchev Revisionists Are Betrayers of People’s War’ immediately 
connects the significance of the War to the current political struggle in international community, 
and mobilizes the Chinese people for the possible regional conflicts and strives that were seen as 
imminent around that time.  

Meant as a grand narrative of the War perhaps more than any other genre, the document 
explicitly defines the historical significance of the War in the modern history of China. In one of 
the first several paragraphs, Lin claims 

 
Of the innumerable anti-imperialists wars waged by the Chinese people in the past 
hundred years, the War of Resistance Against Japan was the first to end in complete 
victory. It occupies an extremely important place in the annals of war, in the annals of 
both the revolutionary wars of the Chinese people and the wars of the oppressed nations 
of the world against imperialist aggression. (Lin 1965, 1) 
 
What can not be missed from such a historical definition is the triumphant tone that 

singled out the War as the victorious starting point for an ascending grand narrative where the 
nation was led from one victory to another. And what is more, according to the Marxist-Leninist 
tenets, the War was interpreted as a necessary, ineluctable and thus almost ‘essential’ stage in a 
teleological history where the social progress must be brought up step by step:  

 

146

 
The War of Resistance Against Japan constituted a historical stage in China’s new-
democratic revolution. The line of our Party during the War of Resistance aimed not only 
at winning victory in the war, but also at laying the foundations for the nation-wide 
victory of the new-democratic revolution. Only the accomplishment of the new-
democratic revolution makes it possible to carry out a socialist revolution (10).  
 
Not only was the War deemed a necessary and vital stage in history, it was also 

interpreted as contributing tremendously to the eventual victory of the Communist Party and its 
army over the Kuomingtang regime, because, as Lin acknowledged in the following paragraph, it 
allowed the party and people’s army to husband their power, hone their military skills and 
struggle experiences, and more importantly, establish revolutionary base areas that were to 
become ‘the springboards for the People’s War of Liberation’ (25):  

 
The Chinese people’s victory in the War of Resistance paved the way for their seizure of 
state power throughout the country. When the Kuomingtang reactionaries, backed by the 
U.S. imperialists, launched a nation-wide civil war in 1946, the Communist party of 
China and Comrade Mao Tse-tung further developed the theory of people’s war, led the 
Chinese people in waging a people’s war on a still larger scale, and in the space of a little 
over three years the great victory of the People’s Liberation War was won, the rule of 
imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism in our country ended and the People’s 
Republic of China founded (3). 
 
Such a historical definition, which interprets the War as playing a critical and almost 

‘positive’ role in bringing up the eventual triumph and liberation of Chinese people, entails the 
construction of an immaculate hero whose virtues must be perfect and victory complete, and a 
defeated foe whose ‘badness’ must be definite but prowess understated. In other words, the 
binary code in this heroic, ascending narrative must be that of the ‘David vs. Goliath’ genre, 
instead of a helpless ‘victim’ vs. ruthless ‘perpetrator’ type, lest the latter would convey too 
much a sense of agony, suffering and distress that contradicts the heroic images of the victors 
and dampens the revolutionary optimism and heroism that was deemed as the soul of the 
revolution.  

Predictably, eternal glory goes to the CCP and Comrade Mao Tsu-tung. Main part of the 
monograph composes an ode to the ‘mission impossible’ achieved by CCP during the War, who 
had, according to Lin, managed to build a national united front “that embraced all the anti-
Japanese classes and strata” (Lin 1965 11), “compel the Kuomingtang ruling clique to stop the 
civil war and co-operate for joint resistance” (8), “hold aloft the banner of national liberation”(7) 
against all odds, take upon their shoulders “the heavy responsibility of combating Japanese 
imperialism” (2), and fought courageously and tenaciously against the aggressors until the final 
victory came to their side. And of course, none of such heroic feats were possible if it were not 
for the sagacity of Chairman Mao who scientifically analyzed the contrasting features between 
the Chinese nation and the Japanese imperialism (8), wisely concluded that this would be a 
‘protracted war” (8), put into effect the correct Marxist-Leninist political and military lines (2), 
and formulated the most efficient strategy and tactics of people’s war. 

And loyal to the logic of a heroic narrative, the sacred protagonist must be endowed with 

such undaunted fearlessness and buoyant heroism that not a trace of tragic sense of loss or 

 

147

suffering is allowed in the depiction even when it is confronted with ‘extremely difficult 
circumstances’ (Lin 25). A telling piece of evidence could be found in the following paragraph 
where Lin attempted to demonstrate how the development of the revolutionary base areas is not 
“plain sailing all the time” (Lin 24):  

 
Between 1937 and 1940 the population in the anti-Japanese base areas grew to 
100,000,000. But in 1941-42, the Japanese imperialists used the major part of their 
invading forces to launch frantic attacks on our base areas and wrought havoc. 
Meanwhile, the Kuomingtang, too, encircled these base areas, blockaded them and went 
so far as to attack them. So by 1942, the anti-Japanese base areas had contracted and their 
population was down to less than 50,000,000. Placing complete reliance on the masses, 
our Party resolutely adopted a series of correct policies and measures, with the result that 
the base areas were able to hold out under extremely difficult circumstances. After this 
setback, the army and the people in the base areas were tempered and grew stronger. (24-
25) 
 
Notice here how the tragic loss of more than 50,000,000 lives were being dismissed light-

heartedly with a brush of ‘the population was down’, and how a series of most brutal and 
murderous massacre committed by the Japanese forces during the War, which later became 
notoriously known for its guiding line of ‘Three Extinction Policy”, literally meaning “burning 
all, killing all and looting all”, was presented as just another ordinary ‘setback’ through which 
the army and the people could be tempered.   

While the eulogy to heroes was ardent and the construction of the sacred solid, the 

identification and portrayal of the profane side was not without ambiguity. Browsing through the 
monograph, one cannot but get a curious impression that the major antagonist in this document, 
which was intended as a piece of commemoration work for the War of Resistance Against Japan, 
is not Japanese imperialism at all. In fact, throughout the entire 68 pages, not a single war crime 
or brutality committed by the Japanese forces was mentioned, and except for a negative adjective 
‘barbarous’(Lin 8) , used only once when the nature of the war was being discussed, not any 
characterizing profane code heavier than this was attributed to the Japanese forces. To make the 
camp of the enemy more equivocal, the former foe were depicted as harboring the potential to 
become the loyal alliance of the sacred camp, as Lin proudly claimed that  

 
During the anti-Japanese war we… succeeded in converting not a few Japanese prisoners, 
who had been badly poisoned by fascist ideology. After they were politically awakened, 
they organized themselves into anti-war organizations such as the League for the 
Liberation of the Japanese People, the Anti-War League of the Japanese in China and the 
League of Awakened Japanese, helped us to disintegrate the Japanese army and co-
operated with us in opposing Japanese militarism. Comrade Sanzo Nosaka, the leader of 
the Japanese Communist Party, who was then in Yenan, gave us great help in this work 
(30).  
In comparison to the Japanese camp, which seems to verge on the border of ‘sacred’ and 

‘profane’ and harbor the potential of being ‘sacredized’ from time to time, the profanity of the 
leading devil of the antagonist in this narrative, Chiang Kai-shek and his Kuomingtang 
reactionaries, seems hard to redeem. One might have already noticed how in narrating Japanese 
forces’ attack on the base areas in 1941-42, the Kuomingtang forces were identified as their 

 

148

accomplices. Indeed, it seems the rule that the Japanese were seldom constructed as the sole 
offender without the accompanying profanization of Kuomingtang forces; and more often than 
not, Kuomingtang reactionaries were not only singled out the as main devil, the profane code 
assigned to them carries much heavier symbolic weight. The following words and expressions 
sampled from the monograph, all of which are quite explicit in their demonizing message, help 
to illuminates the point.  

According to these depiction, it was the Kuomingtang reactionaries who “had betrayed 

the revolution, massacred large numbers of Communists and destroyed all the revolutionary 
mass organizations” (26) after the First Revolutionary Civil War; it was their forces that 
“crumbled and fled into one defeat after another”, when the Japanese forces surged into China’s 
hinderland; when the CCP called for a national united front, it was them again who were 
engaged in ‘passive resistance to Japan and active opposition to the Communist Party’, 
suppressed ‘people’s resistance movement’ and carries “treacherous activities for compromise 
and capitulation” (15) ; and what’s more, it was Chiang Kai-shek, “our teacher by negative 
example”, who “repeatedly lectured us with cannons and machine-guns”, that launched ‘surprise 
attack’ on the part of the New Fourth Army located in Anhwei in 1941, “slaughtered” many of 
our “heroic revolutionary fighters” and brought “disastrous losses” to our units (17). Obviously, 
in comparison to the verbs or adjectives used to depict the Japanese forces which tend to be 
neutral in it undertone, the Kuomingtang, as the antagonist, were portrayed explicitly as 
‘treacherous’, ‘brutal’, ‘ruthless’, ‘cowardly’, and its crime of ‘massacre’ and ‘slaughter’ more 
unforgivable. Such a comparison indicates that there exists in the identification and coding of the 
enemies a sense of hierarchy, with the Kuomingtang ranking as the top, irredeemable devils, and 
the Japanese imperialism much lower in the ranking and prone to be converted or salvaged.  

Because of its particular literary genre and the current political needs it has to serve, Lin’s 

commemoration piece as a whole may not be able to stand for all the works that commemorate 
the War, however, two narrative and semiotic features that become salient in this piece, as 
discussed above, are to be found recurring repeatedly in most of the materials and texts that 
represent and depict the War in Mao’s era, including those that preceded the document in time. 
First, it is manifest that the War was emphatically narrated in a rosily romanticized and fiercely 
heroic pattern, or what Frye would have referred to as Romance135, which, by putting ultimate 
symbolic significance upon the eventual outcome of victory, localized and temporarized the War 
into a self-contented and transitional historical stage that had been gratifyingly sealed with a 
happy-ending and thereby prompted the continuous triumphant march of history along an 
ascending spiral.  
Second, the article shows an intriguing sense of semiotic hierarchy and ambiguity that exists in 
the identification and coding of the profane camp of enemies which not only tends to rank the 
Japanese forces as a much lesser evil than Kuomingtang reactionaries, crucified as the ultimate 
representative of all class enemies, but from time to time, renders the former precious symbolic 
possibilities for redemption and transcending opportunities to be allies and friends that has been 
absolutely denied for the latter.  

 

Combined with the absent-minded and scanty commemoration of the War in public 

sphere, these features as shown in Lin’s article help to highlight the salient absence of a 
collective trauma making process centered on the War experience. They demonstrate that there 
                                                 
135 As this is a term that was coined by Frye (????) in the context of Western literature, the denotation and 
connotation of the concept may not be able to convey the meaning of the situation in the most relevant and accurate 
way. However, it does perhaps help to showcase a general pattern with which the War was narrated in China.  

 

149

has neither been a carrier group making trauma claims nor any conscious endeavors to build the 
trauma on a collective level. At the same time, two other essential elements to a trauma building 
process were also evidently missing. On the one hand, unlike the oppressed, exploited, 
massacred and trampled proletariat class as constructed in the trauma of class struggle, the 
identification of victims of the War were curiously yet thoroughly shunned, turned into a non-
identity or non-existence; in its place, as Lin’s eulogy to the People’s war so vividly illustrates, 
any potential victims would have been constructed as heroic soldier of resistance, intrinsically 
rejecting and denying enactment of victimhood. On the other hand, unlike the unequivocal and 
absolute evil of class enemies, the brutality of the potential perpetrators in the case of the War, 
the Japanese invading army, was always posed in such a way as it appears not worthy of 
consideration in comparison with the ultimate vile of Kuomintang regime and all the class 
enemies it represented; the identification of a perpetrator group for the War was thus eluded, 
eclipsed and shifted back to the identical target of the trauma of class struggle.  

While different texts might differ in their degree of convergence to the general pattern, 
and in some local and concrete derivative works, deviant representations might occur from time 
to time, in the following analysis, it could be forcefully demonstrated that these features as well 
as the absence of a traumatic construction are overwhelmingly representative and prevalent of 
the cultural framework in the representation and memorization of the War in Mao’s era.  
 
Representation of the War in Cultural Products 
 

Take The East is Red for instance, a song and dance epic of the Chinese revolution that 

debuted at the Great Hall of the People, Beijing, in October 1964. Made in celebration of the 
15th anniversary of the founding of the new republic, the epic performance presents a vivid 
depiction of Chinese revolution in forms of songs, dance, opera and ballet and thus offers an 
ideal text for interpreting how the nation represents its own past and defines its collective 
identity to the public, including the construction of the War in public arena136. Among the five 
major episodes that compose the epic performance, each referring to a historical stage 
understood as critical to the revolutionary cause, the fourth one was dedicated to the War of 
Resistance against Japan, with the title of ‘the Anti-Japanese Beacon-Fire’. Following the 
general pattern of the entire performance, paragraphs of ‘explicatory words’ were inserted in-
between performances, which were usually recited by anchormen and women with passion and 
artistic presentation. These paragraphs serve to inaugurate the episode, connect between sections 
of performance as intermissions and also to contextualize the episode within the larger picture of 
                                                 
136 The significance of this epic performance is unquestionable. Not only was it one of the most spectacular 
extravaganzas in the cultural horizon of Mao’s era, it has ever since been remembered as “one of the grandest art 
performances since the founding of the P.R.C.”.  Indeed, its influence among the Chinese audience has been so 
profound and enduring that even today, when its ideological messages cease to function effectively, its aesthetic and 
artistic values still play an important role in shaping the public imaginaries and compose an inseparable part of the 
collective representation. This point could be powerfully demonstrated by the broad popularity and wide acclaim it 
enjoys among the Chinese public over generations. There has been numerous publication of the music score or song 
books based on the original soundtrack since the debut of the performance and countless local reproduction of the 
performances among the mass people throughout China. The zest perhaps faded for a while since the end of Mao’s 
era, but from early 1990s on until today, with the resurgence of the ‘red’, or ‘revolutionary’, cultural trend, there has 
been another long-lasting growth of the popularity of this epic performance, accompanied with the release of 
innumerable copies of CDs and DVDs that recorded the original performances, the countless remix of the original 
recordings, and innumerable renditions and concerts that reproduce the symphonic and choral version ever since the 
debut of the performance.  

 

150

historical background. But functioning more than just links, they also seem to indicate a 
‘preferred reading’ of the performance to the audience and thus play an important role in shaping 
their interpretation of not only the performance but also the memory of the War that it represents.  

A browse over the ‘explicatory words’ of the fourth episode does illuminate the specific 
understanding of the War that the epic performance attempts to convey. At the beginning, it was 
introduced that the scene now had shifted to the period when the Red Army of Workers and 
Peasants had already finished the ‘unprecedented’ heroic feat of the Long March and the CCP 
called on for a united front against the invading Japanese forces. The tone of the words was then 
sharply turned into indignation as it claimed that  

the Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries, however, disregarding the danger of extinction faced 
by the nation, insisted on turning the guns towards their own people, and persisted in 
their opposition to the Communist party. They bowed and scraped to the Japanese 
imperialism, conceded our territory and land to the enemy without even resisting. How 
many people have lost their beloved family ones and how many have been displaced as a 
result! The fire of fury was burning in the hearts of the mass people!”  

After the performance of several songs and dances that showcased the indignation of the people 
towards the ‘passive resistance’ strategy adopted by the Kuomintang reactionaries and the heroic 
endeavors made by CCP to build base areas in the enemy occupied territory, another paragraph 
of ‘explicatory words’ were presented which goes like  

Our Eighth Route and New Fourth Army fought with tenacity and bravery, bathing in 
blood on the battlefield, and holding back the barbarous attack of the Japanese 
imperialists. Yet what Kuomintang reactionaries were doing then was to besiege our base 
areas with their major troops, attempting to starve us to death! But all were in vain! 
Because the revolutionary people would not be daunted by hardships nor would they be 
defeated by embargo! Responding to the call of the Party and Chairman Mao, the mass 
people and our armies in the base areas were mobilized and started a momentous 
campaign of ‘Great Production’! Adopting the policy of ‘self-reliance’, they would 
overcome any sort of difficulty and persevere in the War of Resistance!” 
The message that these words are meant to convey is explicit, that the CCP and its armies 
are the staunch pillar of strength in the War of resistance and have been fighting tenaciously and 
bravely with the invading Japanese forces throughout. In stark contrast, the only deed that 
Chiang Kai-shek and his Kuomintang forces have been engaged is to undermine the nation’s 
chance of survival by not only not resisting the aggressors at all, but sabotaging CCP’s endeavor 
by assaulting the base areas and suppressing and killing revolutionary people. In this message, 
the significance of the War in itself was no longer the prior issue to be handled, rather, it was 
reduced to a piece of meaningful and particularly revealing backdrop picture against which the 
dialectically oppositional construction of the ultimate sacred and the ultimate profane, that is, the 
CCP and its antagonist devil Kuomintang, can be highlighted.  

While ‘explicatory words’ convey explicit messages, the performance in themselves are 
also telling platform where the representation of the War was being showcased. Among all the 
performance in the fourth episode, one calls for special attention because it is the only piece in 
the entire epic performance that directly recreates CCP’s fight during the War of Resistance, 
instead of its conducting a ‘Great Production’ Campaign or mobilizing students’ movements (?). 
The performance is a dance performed by a dozens of dancers, accompanied by ‘the Song of 
Guerillas’, sung by a chorus at the backstage. Though a small section of the dance attempts to 
reproduce the scene of a battle, the enemy never materialized and the major theme seems to be 

 

151

focusing on the demonstration of the superior tactics of the guerilla soldiers and the merit of the 
particular type of War that had been advocated by Lin Piao in his article, namely, the People’s 
War. Such a choice of the theme and of the way that it was choreographed was not without 
meaning, though it must also be determined by the needs and requirements of an artistic stage 
presentation at the same time. The absence of the enemy on stage downplays the significance of 
the identification of THE enemy, and thereby makes the scene consistent with the main message 
of the episode. At the same time, concentrating upon eulogizing the extraordinary fighting tactics 
of the guerilla forces also contributes positively to the heroic ascending narrative pattern of the 
entire epic performance. Just as the lyrics of the Song of Guerillas demonstrates, these guerilla 
soldiers were portrayed as being capable of conquering any possible adversities and finding ways 
to triumph throughout regardless the dangers and insurmountable difficulties they have to face: 

 
We are sharpshooters, wipe out one enemy by only one bullet; we are pilots, no matter 
how high the mountain and how deep the water is; in the tight forest, comrade's camp is 
all over; on the high mountains, there's unlimited numbers of our brothers. If we haven't 
food and clothes, enemy will give us; if we haven't weapon, enemy will supply us. We 
are born in here, every inch of the land is ourselves’; no matter who want to occupy it 
forcefully, we will struggle with him till the end137. 
Obviously, the heroic construction of the protagonist here is thoroughly optimistic and 

cheerful. They were empowered with agency and autonomy, and a mighty capacity to surmount 
any obstacle and prevail. Notice that in this heroic construction, there was even little symbolic 
space for a tragic hero, because no signs of suffering, pain or sense of loss, signs that would 
betray a sense of helplessness or vulnerability was involved. This is perhaps to comply with and 
exemplify the guidelines that advise the production of artistic and literary works representing 
Chinese revolution as stipulated by the Central Committee of the Party (?note), namely, the 
‘revolutionary romanticism’ and ‘revolutionary heroism’138, both of which entail not only an 
ascending narrative pattern that must end in triumphant note, but the portrait of immaculate 
heroes that remain undaunted and buoyant no matter how much pain they have to suffer and how 
much danger they have to face. Such a portrait could of course boost up morale and strengthen 
revolutionary spirit, but it would also preempt the possibility of the emergence of a tragic or 
traumatic reading, because the denial of human defects or signs of human weaknesses in these 
hero characters intrinsically rejects the construction of victimhood. Indeed, with an assertion as 
hyper-romantic and light-hearted as that being made in the lyrics “If we haven't food and clothes, 
enemy will give us; if we haven't weapon, enemy will supply us”, who would even feel a slight 
trace of sadness or sympathy for these guys, but not want desperately to be one of them and 
enjoy the romantic experience of fighting as a guerilla soldier?  

What had been shown from the analysis of the fourth episode of The East is Red is that 
the general patterns that were summarized from Lin’s commemoration article in the previous 
section are also prevalent in the artistic representation of the War, i.e., the heroic ascending 
narrative that are characterized with revolutionary romanticism and revolutionary heroism, and 
the emphasis upon the construction of a primary enemy that hinges upon class struggle which 
                                                 
137 The English translation was revised by the author, based on a version that comes from the following website: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guerillas'_Song.  
138 The two ‘isms’ are the soul of the revolutionary discourse in China and permeate throughout not only the grand 
narrative that tells the modern history but also creative works that contribute to the propaganda campaign for the 
revolutionary causes both before and after the founding of the People’s Republic. 

 

152

diminishes the War as being meaningful only as a stage background where the fight against 
Kuomintang was put on a show.  

 

Construction of the War in Literary Works 
 

Such patterns were being reproduced extensively also in literary works published in 

1950s and 1960s, part of which were being revised and selected into school Chinese 
textbooks139.  Among all the texts taken into Chinese textbooks for senior elementary and junior 
high schools in the 1950s and 1960s, there were eight that tell about stories of the War, all 
selected from novels or other literary works written by writers under the leadership of CCP and 
published during the 1940s to late 1950s.  And with the exception of one140, almost all the works 
focus upon stories of the guerilla forces or civilian soldiers in the CCP-led base areas, and 
particularly their fight and experience in the face of the ‘Annihilation Campaign’ launched by the 
Japanese forces, mainly during 1941-1942 (?).   

Reading through these chapters, one could not but get a curious mixture of feelings that 
combines excitement, envy, sense of empowerment, and joy; indeed, one could hardly refrain 
from exclaiming loudly, ‘what an extraordinary and romantic life these guys had!’ and feeling an 
irresistible urge to go and become one of them. Such a response, which implies a strong sense of 
symbolic identification, of course, comes as a result of the picture of the War that emerges from 
the portrayal of these chapters. And the picture of the War, as depicted from these pages, is not 
only predictably victorious and heroic, but incurably romantic and rosy.  

In fact, one theme that all these chapters share in common is that any conflict between the 
CCP-led forces and the Japanese invading armies must inevitably end with a thorough triumph of 
the former party. What is even more amazing is to find that in none of these chapters was there a 
single loss of life or casualty being mentioned or depicted on the side of the Chinese people; it 
seems almost a rule that ‘our’ victory must come at no cost of lives or blood, lest it will ruin the 
immaculate image of the revolutionary people. This was even true for texts that depict battle 
scenes that are admittedly bloody and gory. For instance, in the text titled ‘Triumph in the 
Pingxing Valley’, it was depicted that the battle lasted from afternoon to late evening, that the 
entire battle field was bombarded by the enemy bombs and the soldiers had to fight with their 
bayonets; still, the victory comes clean of any single word on the death or sacrifice made by 
‘our’ side. In a more dramatic chapter, titled ‘At the Baiyang Lake’, the ‘zero casualty’ rule was 
                                                 
139 My original data come from Chinese textbooks for senior elementary and junior high school published during 
1950s and 1960s. There were altogether two versions published by the central People’s Education Publishing House, 
one around mid 1950s, published consecutively through 1954-1956, the other around early 1960s, through 1963-
1964. Focusing on school textbooks proves to be more yielding than sampling directly from the pool of novels and 
other literary works being published because of two reasons: first, because textbooks must fulfill the most significant 
function of inculcating values and morals into the younger generation, and shape them into collective beings, the 
literary works and novels selected into them would have already been scrutinized and are considered as being most 
representative and consistent with the ideological and political message that the central authority endorsed. This 
makes the novels and literary works selected into texts most revealing of the way that the society wants the War to 
be represented and memorized by the next generation. Second, while it is hard to estimate the amount of readers of 
novels and literary works, the extent of circularity of textbooks was perhaps the widest, given the 9 year obligatory 
education system in China. This means the picture of the War as represented and depicted in the texts is perhaps one 
the most widely accepted versions among Chinese people.  
140 The exceptional one is titled ‘the Triumph in Pingxing Valley’, selected into Book no. 3 of the Chinese textbook 
for elementary school published in 1955. The text will be discussed in detail later because it is almost the only one 
that depicts a headlong confront between the CCP-led Eighth-route army and the Japanese forces.   

 

153

even extended to animals; a big cock that became the target of Japanese soldiers’ chase, the latter 
of whom obviously wanted to grab it for a long-awaited treat of meat, escaped its doom 
unscathed. On the contrary, every single casualty of the War as mentioned in these chapters 
came from the side of the Japanese forces and the Chinese puppet troops, and their loss was 
usually quite severe, as demonstrated by the previously mentioned text about the battle in 
Pingxing Valley, where the narration was concluded with the following sentence “the bodies of 
the enemy covered the roads and the hillsides…the battle was won and victory belongs to 
us.141”  

Not only must ‘our’ victories be tremendous and come at no cost, in these chapters, they 
also come with such convenience and ease; usually, the right thing happens about the right time 
in the right place so that all the conducible elements coincide to contribute to the eventual 
triumph of the people. In a text titled ‘Yanling Troop’, for instance, that tells about how a small 
guerilla dispatch team thwarted a round of attack made by the Japanese water forces, the defeat 
of the enemy was portrayed as just a piece of cake; as soon as the enemy characters made their 
appearance into the scene, they fell into the trap prepared by the guerilla soldiers and their fate 
already doomed. And predictably, the battle scene barely started when all the dozens of Japanese 
soldiers were erased with a light brush, and their much more advanced weapons and the 
impressive modern steamboat became the booty of a boisterous crowd of guerilla soldiers. In the 
previously mentioned text ‘At the Baiyang Lake’, to give another example, at the critical 
moment when three young women who hid themselves into piles of reeds were exposed and 
faced with the fate of being captured, handily, one of them came up with a grenade and 
efficiently killed all the three soldiers that chased them. And afterwards, even when ‘Guizi’ took 
revenge by setting fire to all the piles of grasses, they somehow miraculously escaped to safety 
without a scratch.  

The incredible prowess and good fortune of the Chinese people as depicted in these 

chapters is juxtaposed sharply with the portrait of their antagonists, always constructed as being 
ridiculously weak, absurdly stupid and incredibly unfortunate. As a matter of fact, though they 
were most frequently referred to as ‘Guizi’, Chinese words for ‘the devils’, their images as 
portrayed in these chapters were far from being devilish at all142; on certain occasions, the image 
of ‘Guizi’ was so deprived of evil characters that the word starts to pick on it a certain comic 
connotation. To demonstrate this point, it is again worthwhile to turn to the text titled ‘At the 
Baiyang Lake’, where the ‘guizi’ were more vividly portrayed than the other pieces.  

At the beginning of the story, several ‘guizi’ soldiers, who came to attack the Baiyang 

village, were depicted as being exclusively absorbed with catching a cock so that they could give 
themselves a treat; then as their very awkward and absurdly frantic chase was successfully 
                                                 
141 Page 12, Book no.3, Chinese (Textbook for Senior Elementary School). Beijing: People’s Education Publishing 
House. Texts translated into English by the author.  
 
142 This does not mean, of course, that they were not unequivocally coded as ‘evil’ or ‘bad. In the text titled ‘the 
Tunnel War in the Jizhong Plain’, after claiming that “unable to vanquish the people, Guizi started to use other 
attacking techniques, including fire, poisonous gas, and water” (124), it was commented that ‘the means adopted by 
the Guizi were heinous indeed”(122). In the story of ‘Er Huzi’, ‘guizi’ were portrayed as so debased and conniving 
as to attempt to cajole the kids in the village to give out the name of the hidden CCP cadres. And in the worst case, 
in the story titled ‘Yulai is still alive!’, ‘guizi’ was even portrayed as torturing the little boy who they believed knew 
about the whereabouts of an injured CCP cadre, and attempting to execute him when he ran loose miraculously. 
Indeed, the encoding of ‘guizi’ as profane is made very clear and punctuated. However, at the same time, the 
deepening of such an evil never occurred, as I would demonstrate in the following paragraphs.  

 

154

thwarted by the cock, which was personified as brave and tactful as its Chinese master, they 
came across three young Chinese women who hid themselves in the piles of grass. As “guizi” 
happily cried to each other that they found some ‘young pretty women’, they quickly met with 
their premature death by a grenade thrown to them by one of the Chinese girls. One could even 
share a bit of pity to these pathetic ‘guizi’, as they seem not capable of doing any serious harm, 
even less of posing any daunting threat to the invincible and brave Chinese people. Their 
cardinal sin exposed in this piece, the desire for delicious food and beautiful young women, 
makes them even empathizable as human beings.  

If they were allowed to have feelings, these ‘guizi’ soldiers as portrayed in the above 
chapter would perhaps feel satisfied because at least they could appear as some comic figures 
with individual characters, unlike their fellows in other cases, who were not even given a 
recognizable figure, but reduced to an abstract number of casualty or blurred backdrop image of 
the stage where the bravery of the CCP-led forces, as well as the impotency and cowardice of the 
Kuomingtang troops could be showcased. The following text ‘Triumph in the Pingxing Valley’ 
was a great example to the point. It is discussed here at length also because it embodies all the 
characterizing features analyzed above and thus represents an archetype of the narrative telling 
about the War.  

This article is really a rare piece among the texts as well as other literary works because it 

deals with a battle scene between the Eighth Route Army with the Japanese on the frontline, 
which, historically speaking, is one of the few battles where CCP-led forces confronted directly 
with the Japanese armies other than in guerrilla warfare often conducted in enemy-occupied 
areas. The text starts with an introduction of the context of the battle, which, significantly 
informative, took up almost 2/3 of the entire text. While the Eighth Route Army solider were 
depicted as brave, fearless and eager to join the battle, the nationalist army was predictably 
portrayed as the dialectical opposition of the CCP soldiers, and the portrayal of their 
cowardliness and panic, and their acquisitiveness and detestable mug towards the civilian people 
almost occupied the entirety of this part of the text.  

To illustrate how the Kuomintang troop had been corrupted and impotent from top to the 
rank and file, it was said that the commander of the troop, “even before he could see the Japanese 
army through his telescope, had already escaped with his troops… and he ran in a run for 
hundreds of miles before he dared to stop to take a breath.” (8) And to pose a sharp contrast, the 
eighth route army was depicted as heading straightforward to the direction where the enemies 
came and thus confronted the nationalist escaping soldiers face to face, when they were 
portrayed as “some of them lost their caps, some even their military badges… yet they carried 
with them the properties and chickens that they grabbed from the civilian’s household on their 
way of running away.” (8) To make their thug-like images fuller, in the next paragraph, the 
civilian people were depicted as complaining to the eighth route army their predicament at the 
hand of the Kuomintang troops, some with tears. In their words, Kuomintang were ‘worse than 
the bandits’ (9) and people ‘hated them with such a profound resentment that their teeth start to 
itch whenever the nationalists were being mentioned” (9).  

The text then turns to write about the strategic maneuver made by CCP commander Lin 
Biao, which predictably is composed of a long eulogy to the wisdom and talent of the leader and 
the sense of dedication and strength of the CCP soldiers. It was not until the last several 
paragraphs of the text that the battle was briefly narrated, and the real enemy of the battle 
eventually stepped onto the stage. But as we have observed repeatedly, their doom was 
prearranged and came along almost too quickly; and within a few sentences, the story already 

 

155

ended with a triumphant tone “the bodies of the enemy covered the roads and the hillsides…the 
battle was won and victory belongs to us.” (12) It will be hard not to notice that in this 
‘recreation’ of one of the most famous battles fought by the CCP with the Japanese forces, the 
‘legitimate’ enemy were not even an active human player; rather they were presented like 
stagnant puppet figures without recognizable individual faces and function only as a necessary 
yet passive part of the ‘stage’ setting in the scene. And except for the label of ‘enemy’ assigned 
to them, no enthusiastic attempts were made to ‘construct’ the ‘evilness’ of the figure or to make 
the images more concrete or tangible.  

With the discussion of ‘Triumph in Pingxing Valley’, we will be able to conclude our 

analysis of the narrative of the War in Mao’s era because the former is almost an epitome of the 
latter with all the characterizing features present. With unfailing and thorough triumphs that 
always come with as little cost as possible, and with rosy binary construction that reminds one of 
childhood tales where bad rascals will always be defeated by good people, the narration of the 
War is a perfect embodiment of the ‘revolutionary heroism’ and ‘revolutionary romanticism’ and 
serves loyally as a masterpiece chapter in the grand ascending narrative about the founding of the 
new nation. Defined as a hard yet necessary transitional stage through which revolution shall be 
won, representation of the War always appeared a bit absent-minded and off-the-target, because 
the literal enemy in the War are not necessarily the ‘legitimate’ and ‘true’ enemy of the people 
and the perpetrators ‘correctly’ defined in other more successfully ‘told’ stories must be given 
more symbolic significance. With the heroic construction of the protagonist that inherently 
denies victimhood, and with the hierarchy in the ranking of the ‘evilness’ where the Japanese 
forces were always toppled by the more ‘proper’ camps ‘class-wise’, such a narrative 
intrinsically preempts the emergence of a traumatic representation of War.  

In the larger picture, the emergence of a traumatic construction of the War was hindered 

in the first place by the powerfully built collective trauma of the old society and class struggle 
which, as I have tried to show in the previous sections, serve as the very basis upon which the 
new nation and collectivity came into being. The absolute evil of class enemies and the 
unspeakable nature of the sufferings as built in the collective trauma leave little space for the 
portrayal of another evil of a similar symbolic weight. And the class abyss that divides the 
victims and the perpetrators made other conflicts that do not come along the line seem erasable. 
After all, in comparison with a landlord who would not hesitate to strip your skin and who 
therefore must be eliminated without mercy, a Japanese soldier, not capable of doing any serious 
harm and possibly also a victim of class oppression himself, is a much more amicable figure and 
demonstrates more potential of redemption.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

156

 
 
 
 
 
Selected Reference 
  
Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1963. Chinese 

(Textbook for Junior High School, newly edited in 1963). Book No.1. Beijing: People’s 
Education Publishing House.  

Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1963. Chinese 

(Textbook for Junior High School, newly edited in 1963). Book No.2. Beijing: People’s 
Education Publishing House.  

Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1964. Chinese 

(Textbook for Junior High School, newly edited in 1964). Book No.3. Beijing: People’s 
Education Publishing House.  

Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1964. Chinese 

(Textbook for Junior High School, newly edited in 1964). Book No.4. Beijing: People’s 
Education Publishing House.  

Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1960. Chinese 
(Textbook for Junior High School). Book No.5. Hangzhou: People’s Education Publishing 
House in Zhejiang.  

Editorial Division for Chinese Course, People’s Education Publishing House. 1960. Chinese 
(Textbook for Junior High School). Book No.6. Hangzhou: People’s Education Publishing 
House in Zhejiang.  

People’s Education Publishing House. 1954. Chinese (Textbook for Junior High School). Book 

No.1. Shenyang: People’s Education Publishing House.  

People’s Education Publishing House. 1954. Chinese (Textbook for Junior High School). Book 

No.2. Shenyang: People’s Education Publishing House. 

People’s Education Publishing House. 1954. Chinese (Textbook for Junior High School). Book 

No.3. Shenyang: People’s Education Publishing House. 

People’s Education Publishing House. 1955. Chinese (Textbook for Junior High School). Book 

No.4. Shenyang: People’s Publishing House of the Northeast. 

People’s Education Publishing House. 1954. Chinese (Textbook for Junior High School). Book 

People’s Education Publishing House. 1955. Chinese (Textbook for Senior Elementary School). 

Book 1. Beijing: People’s Education Publishing House. 

People’s Education Publishing House. 1955. Chinese (Textbook for Senior Elementary School). 

Book 2. Shenyang: People’s Publishing House of Liaoning. 

People’s Education Publishing House. 1955. Chinese (Textbook for Senior Elementary School). 

Book 3. Beijing: People’s Education Publishing House. 

People’s Education Publishing House. 1956. Chinese (Textbook for Senior Elementary School). 

Book 4. Beijing: People’s Education Publishing House. 

People’s Education Publishing House. 1954. Chinese (Textbook for Junior High School). Book 

No.5. Shenyang: Xin Hua Bookstore. 

No.6. Shenyang: Xin Hua Bookstore. 

 

157

The Pedagogical Reference Material Editing Committee of Beijing Elementary and High 

Schools. 1955. Pedagogical Reference Materials. (Junior High School Chinese Textbook 
Book 3). 

The Pedagogical Reference Material Editing Committee of Beijing Elementary and High 

Schools. 1955. Pedagogical Reference Materials. (Junior High School Chinese Textbook 
Book 5). 

Lin, Piao. 1965. Long Live the Victory of People’s War! In Commemoration of the 20th 

Anniversary of Victory in the Chinese People’s War of Resistance Against Japan. Beijing: 
Foreign Language Press.  

(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)1964(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31) 
(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)1964(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31) 
(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)1965(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)V3 in 
notes) 
(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)1965(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(V4 in notes) 
(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)1965(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(V5 in 
notes) 
(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)1965(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(V6 in 
notes) 
(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31) 1965. (cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31) 
(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)1965. (cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31) 
(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)1978(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Yale Cultural Trauma Project meeting, Athens 15-17 June, 2009 

 

158

A Fire That Doesn’t Burn? The Allied Bombing of Germany and the Cultural Politics of 

 

Trauma143 

 

Volker Heins 

Andreas Langenohl 

 
A lot of seriously bad things happened to Germans during and immediately after World War II. 
More than five million soldiers were killed, most of them on the eastern front. Those who 
survived the war in the east were often wounded, half-crazed or frostbitten, and were further 
decimated by the harsh conditions in Soviet POW camps. British and American bombers 
attacked more than one hundred German cities and towns, reducing many of them to a sea of 
rubble, killing around six-hundred thousand civilians, and making many more homeless. 
Millions of ethnic Germans who had settled in Poland or Czechoslovakia fled the onslaught of 
the Red Army, or were later expelled by the newly established communist governments. On their 
way to Berlin and in the fallen capital itself, Soviet soldiers raped altogether perhaps one and a 
half million women, often “in the presence of their menfolk, to underline the humiliation” (Evans 
2009: 710).  

This list of horrors is, of course, deliberately one-sided in that it ignores not only the 

endless suffering inflicted by Germans on their non-German victims including their own Jewish 
fellow-citizens, but also questions of causal and moral responsibility. Historians like Richard 
Evans have shown that such questions are not only been asked in hindsight, but were already on 
the minds of many ordinary people during the war itself. To some degree at least, Germans saw 
their own misery filtered through a sense of what had been done to others in their name. Given 
the context that has shaped the experience of suffering especially of German civilians, we 
believe it is interesting to explore how they have represented their own suffering, how these 
representations have been transmitted into the collective and national memory, and to what 
extent the political culture has been shaped by war-related memory projects. 

In his influential lectures On the Natural History of Destruction, the German-born writer 

W.G. Sebald notes that some of the occurrences of the war, in particular the mighty air raids 
against German cities “left scarcely any trace of pain behind in the collective consciousness” 
(Sebald 2004: 4). We suggest to rephrase this statement by saying that the memory of the 
bombing war has not been turned into a national or “cultural trauma.” In other words, Germans 
do not remember the situation of their cities being firebombed and often completely flattened by 
identifiable actors as a psychologically searing event that has forever transformed and still 
defines their identity. The destruction of much of Germany is not remembered and 
commemorated to mark off this nation against others in fundamentally new ways. The question 
we try to answer is why this particular collective experience of suffering has not, in spite of its 
horrifying proportions, given rise to a cultural trauma. The answer given by Sebald (2004: 11) is 
that there has been a “taboo” on speaking about the devastation and suffering caused by the 
Allied air war. What is implied is that Germans felt no longer entitled to speak of themselves as 
victims as they increasingly accepted their image of being perpetrators of war crimes and the 
Holocaust. We believe that this answer is flawed. For one, the term “taboo” insinuates that 
                                                 
143 Acknowledgments: Till van Rahden, Sulamith Gräfenstein, the Press and Public Relations Office of the city of 
Dresden. 

 

159

Germans should finally break the silence and lay claim to their own suffering, something they 
have done all along. In modern societies, calling something a taboo does not end a conversation 
but on the contrary introduces issues into the public debate in a sensationalist way. Sebald’s 
claim also implies that there is something fundamentally wrong with German war memories. 
Yet, we argue that there is considerable controversy, incoherence and awkwardness, but nothing 
pathological or repressed about the way in which most Germans remember and commemorate 
the devastation of their cities and the death of civilians during the war.  

In developing our argument, we not only agree with but wish to bolster Jeffrey 

Alexander’s and Ron Eyerman’s point that a cultural trauma does not directly flow from 
historical occurrences, however horrible they may have been. Rather, cultural traumas are 
socially constructed through narratives and other forms of representation. For Sebald, the 
absence of almost any trace of pain in the memory of the bombing war is something 
“paradoxical” (Sebald 2004: 4), because he assumes that there is a positive correlation between 
the magnitude of suffering experienced by a collectivity and the intensity of memories 
transmitted from one generation to the next. For us, such a correlation exists only to the extent in 
which a social and political consensus on the meaning of the relevant historical instance of 
suffering can be constructed and effectively communicated. Yet it is also true that a recognizable 
instance of massive suffering is always the raw material of cultural trauma. In fact, the most 
prominent examples of sociological trauma theory have so far been American slavery (Eyerman 
2002) and the Holocaust (Alexander 2003: chap. 2). Slavery in the antebellum South was an 
instance of collective suffering that has been turned into a cultural trauma of successor 
generations of the same victim group of Afro-Americans. The Holocaust was an instance of 
collective suffering that has been turned into a cultural trauma of successor generations of the 
victim group, Jews, as well as for successor generations of (non-Jewish) Germans and other 
national membership groups who were the perpetrators and bystanders of the Holocaust. Our 
case study breaks new ground by focusing on an instance of collective suffering—the Allied 
bombing of German cities during World War II—that has not become a cultural trauma, not even 
for the successor generations of the victim group.144  

In what follows, we give a short overview of the ways in which the air war has been 

remembered, memorialized and commemorated in postwar Germany. We begin by rejecting the 
widespread claim that the memories of German victims, in general, and of civilian bombing 
victims, in particular, were actively silenced in postwar Germany. Instead, we sketch out the 
memory matrix that in our view has underpinned and constrained practices of remembrance of 
the Bombenkrieg. We then turn to three case vignettes to shed light on the reasons why the 
bombings have not given rise to a cultural trauma. First, we highlight the case of Hamburg, 
which among German cities was hit the hardest by British bombers in 1943. More specifically, 
we are interested in how the rise of the Holocaust trauma has rendered the remembrance of the 
firebombing of Hamburg more complex, inconsistent and ultimately non-traumatic. Second, we 
look at attempts to draw analogies between the high-altitude bombing of German cities and the 
bombing of other places, in particular Baghdad in the second Gulf War (1990-91). This analogy 
allowed sections of the German public to mourn the victims of American bombs without 
explicitly reactivating nationalist or revisionist notions of German victimhood. Third, we briefly 
explore the memory and commemoration of the 1945 bombings of Dresden, in which neo-Nazi 
                                                 
144 This is true at least in terms of the cultural trauma theory as proposed by Alexander and Eyerman. In the 
psychoanalytic sense of the term, traumas might well be transmitted through certain communicative strains and 
failings from one generation of both victims and perpetrators to the next (see Bergmann and Jucovy 1990). 

 

160

extremists, who would like to redefine the memory of the bombings as the new cultural trauma 
of post-reunification Germany, play a major role. The final section summarizes the reasons why 
we believe that memory projects aiming at the establishment of a cultural bombing trauma in 
Germany are unlikely to succeed anytime soon. 

 

The German Bombing War Memory Matrix  

Since the reunification of Germany in 1990, every major broadcast or publication on the 
bombing of the country during World War II has been pitched as taboo-breaking. However, there 
has never really been a taboo on representing the suffering of Germans. In fact, this is a rumor or 
legend so ubiquitous that it requires explanation. However, like all rumors and legends, the idea 
of a taboo on representing Germans as victims is based on a small kernel of truth. 

Our main point is that what has been forgotten is not the bombing war itself but its many 
traces in the memories of those who survived and documented it. Artists, in particular, began to 
draw, paint, wood carve, write about and take photos of the destruction often literally as soon as 
the dust had settled after the air raids. Ignoring an official ban imposed by the Nazi government, 
which was later renewed by the Soviet military authorities, more than thirty “rubble 
photographers” emerged in Dresden alone, some of whom like Kurt Schaarschuch and Richard 
Peter quickly rose to fame (Kil 1989). As early as 1949, Peter published a much-reprinted 
collection of photographs under the title Dresden, eine Kamera klagt an (Dresden: A Camera 
Accuses). Around the same time, German “rubble films” depicting the destruction of cities in 
flashbacks became a genre of its own (Shandley 2001). In 1952, Axel Rodenberger’s bestselling 
memoir Der Tod von Dresden (The Death of Dresden) was published. German studies scholars 
such as Jörg Bernig (2005), Thomas Fox (2006) and Ursula Heukenkamp (2001) have offered 
overviews of the range of artistic representations of the bombing war experience, listing novels, 
memoirs, anthologies, films, poems, plays, song texts and audio recordings that have escaped the 
attention of those who claim that the air war has fallen into oblivion. Especially some of the 
novels are quite well-known and have also been translated into English, for example Horst 
Bienek’s Earth and Fire, Bruno Werner’s The Slave Ship or Hans Erich Nossack’s The End—a 
ruthless account of the 1943 bombing assault on Hamburg that has been praised even by Sebald. 
More influential have been the diaries and stories of Victor Klemperer and Elisabeth Langgässer, 
who were both German-Jewish writers. Other works are noteworthy not for the literary quality 
but for their semi-official status. An example is Erwin Strittmatter’s children’s story Tinko, 
which was first published in 1954 and became mandatory reading for school children in the 
German Democratic Republic. Interestingly, one of the most acclaimed contributions has come 
from abroad: Kurt Vonnegut’s semi-autobiographical Slaughterhouse-Five, an anti-war satire 
written by an American soldier who was held as a prisoner of war in Dresden at the time of the 
air raids. In Germany, this novel has, among other things, been adapted as an opera that 
premiered in Munich in 1996. 

Thus, what we have seen after the war was not a taboo on the remembrance of suffering 
but rather an irrepressible zeal to give meaning to the harrowing experiences of the recent past. 
Ulrike Heukenkamp has observed that writers often did not use a vivid, authentic language to 
describe the experience of being bombed, not because they forgot what had happened, but 
because part of that experience was a sense of panic, of emptiness, of loss of self that led authors 
to use clichéd metaphors such as “hell,” “inferno” or “Judgment Day” to fix the meaning of the 
bombings (Heukenkamp 2001: 470-72). She also points out that talking was less easy for the 
civilian survivors of the bombing war than for the exhausted, defeated and disillusioned soldiers 

 

161

who returned from the front lines of what they saw as the “real” war. The soldiers were often 
compulsively loquacious and have left detailed descriptions of their war experiences in the 
memories of families as well as in literary texts. To the extent it was real, the silencing of civilian 
bombing victims, a majority of them being women, was the result of the restoration of the 
patriarchal family order in which men decided about what counts as an experience worth telling 
and transmitting (Heukenkamp 2001: 470). 

Apart from the perceived lack of authenticity in literary representations and the 

dominance of the memory of front soldiers over the memory of women there is a third factor that 
has contributed to the notion of silence surrounding the human consequences of the bombing 
war. West Germans, in particular, were eager to rebuild their cities and their economy and felt 
that they had no time to look back. Sebald mentions “the unquestioning heroism with which 
people immediately set about the task of clearance and reorganization” (Sebald 2004: 5). This is 
something very different from a taboo although it may as well have had a silencing effect on 
memories. In this context, it is interesting to note that the German will to reconstruction, which 
in West Germany came close to an industrial ethic of high-performance fanaticism, bore a 
striking resemblance to the pioneer ethos of Israel. As José Brunner writes, “Hundreds of 
thousands of Jewish Holocaust survivors found, when they reached Israel after the war, that the 
pioneer-warrior ethos of the Jewish state left them no room to voice their suffering in the public 
sphere” (Brunner 2007: 105). Nobody would claim that there was a taboo on remembering the 
Holocaust in Israel. Yet, as this example illustrates, material and ethical imperatives can have the 
same consequence of restricting the ways in which collectivities remember their own painful 
past. 

That the immense suffering caused by incendiaries and high-explosive bombs dropped 

from the sky was not forgotten does not imply that this particular memory fit easily into a larger, 
agreed-upon frame of public remembrance of World War II. In fact, all the controversies and 
struggles in recent decades have been about this problem: how to insert the memory of the air 
war into the larger process of meaning-making in a way that is in harmony with the self-
description of Germany as a liberal Western democracy. Before we delve into some of the 
political struggles over the memory of the bombings, we want to outline the memory matrix that 
has guided activists and audiences in their attempts to represent those occurrences as broadly 
meaningful and significant. 

We suggest distinguishing four basic positions in recent German memory struggles. 

Three of these positions share the implicit assumption that there was no alternative to the defeat 
of Germany and the Axis Powers by the combined military forces of the Allies. Obviously, neo-
Nazis beg to differ on this point. But we are not aware of a position saying that the German 
people was able or willing to overthrow the government of Hitler on its own. There is thus a 
widely shared conviction that Germany had to be defeated militarily. Let us call this the 
“Carthage must be destroyed” consensus. A classical early statement of this consensus can be 
found in the preface to the first edition of Franz Neumann’s Behemoth: “A military defeat is 
necessary … More and better planes, tanks, and guns and a complete military defeat will uproot 
National Socialism from the mind of the German people” (Neumann 1942: ix). Note that 
Neumann wrote before the emergence of a transnational Holocaust trauma which in retrospect 
has made the imperative to destroy Nazi Germany by military means even more compelling. 
Today, German historians and democratic politicians across the board basically agree on the 
connection that existed between defeating Germany and ending the mass extermination of Jews 
and others groups (see, e.g., Nolte 2008; see also White 2002). Differences among the following 

 

162

first three discursive positions emerge only against the backdrop of this taken-for-granted 
consensus. The fourth position is an outlier, at least for now. 

A just-war position has been articulated by military historians in Britain and the United 

States, and continues to influence in particular left-wing memory activists in Germany to this 
day. This position states that the air bombing of German cities contributed to the defeat of 
National Socialism and was therefore by definition legitimate.145 

The moderate anti-Machiavellian position says that in pursuing highly legitimate war 
aims the Allies employed illegimate means such as the indiscriminate bombing of entire cities. 
Moderate anti-Machiavellians usually refrain from using the term “crime” to describe the 
bombings. They are often members of the liberal academic and political elites in Germany, and 
have called for reconciliation and for strengthening international humanitarian law.146 

A radicalization of the anti-Machiavellian position can be observed among those groups 

who claim that the air bombing of cities did not serve its alleged military purpose. There has 
been, it is argued, a growing disjuncture between ends and means in the final stages of the war. 
Radical anti-Machiavellians use the term “crime” to describe the bombings. Yet these groups, 
too, call for reconciliation and for a moralization of international affairs that goes beyond legal 
reforms.147 

A revisionist right-wing position has been adopted by those who claim that the bombings 

were not meant to serve a limited military purpose but were launched to commit genocidal 
crimes against the Germans. These groups, some of which should be called neo-Nazis, are 
against reconciliation with the former victors, and in favor of bringing them to what they call 
“justice.” 

The foundational moment and organizing principle of this memory matrix is the 

Holocaust. Although the notion that the bombing of cities might appear legitimate, given the 
unrelenting aggressiveness of Nazi Germany, had been formulated earlier, as the example of 
Neumann shows, knowledge about the unprecedented crimes committed in Auschwitz or 
Treblinka dramatically propelled this argument. In fact, the split that divides the memory matrix 
between those who acknowledge the military necessity of pain inflicted upon civilians (if to 
different degrees) and those who indiscriminately reject the air bombings as crimes is congruous 
with the cleavage between those who in principle acknowledge German responsibility for the 
consequences of the Holocaust and those who deny it. Our argument in the following sections is 
                                                 
145 See, e.g., US Air Force Historical Division, “Historical Analysis of the 14-15 February 1945 Bombings of 
Dresden.” Available at: http://www.airforcehistory.hq.af.mil/PopTopics/dresden.htm. The case for the effectiveness 
of the Allied bombing campaign has been made, for example, by Gregor (2000). Rolf-Dieter Müller (2004: 229) of 
the German Military History Research Institute reckons that the air attacks have shortened the war by at least one or 
two years. 
146 The origins of the anti-Machiavellian position can be found in the moral scruples that surfaced in internal debates 
in Britain itself during the war, as Sebald (2004: 14-15) has indicated. For details, see Taylor (2004: 360-66, 376-
79). 
147 German military historians seem to waver between moderate and radical anti-Machiavellian positions. In a 
landmark publication, Müller (2004: 231) speaks of “transgressions” during the Allied bombing campaigns, but 
rejects the term “crime.” Yet the multi-volume history of World War II edited by his research institute concludes 
that the area bombings “massively violated traditional notions of morality” and were a “crime against humaneness 
[Verbrechen gegen die Menschlichkeit],” although not unambiguously illegal in terms of international customary 
law; in light of the ultimate goal, they were much less effective than the destruction of “key industries and militarily 
relevant target groups” (Boog 2008: 874-76). 

 

163

therefore that the memory of the air war on German cities is closely intertwined with struggles 
over the representation of the Nazi past, and in particular of the Holocaust. 

 

The Bombing of Hamburg and the Rise of the Holocaust Trauma 

There can be no doubt that individual experiences of being injured, raped or bombed-out 
as well as the overwhelming collective experience of the military defeat of Germany led, like all 
military defeats in history, to “a complete crushing of self-confidence” (Clausewitz 1976: 255) of 
the vanquished population. As a result, many people, not only Nazi leaders who acted out of a 
warped sense of honor, committed suicide (Evans 2009: 731-32). This was, of course, an option 
only for a small minority. Another small minority was mentally prepared to absorb the news of 
the “ignominy of the concentration camps,” as it was called in October 1945 in the headlines of a 
widely circulating illustrated magazine in Berlin (Kil 1989: 13). The vast majority of Germans, 
however, was occupied with the tasks of surviving and did not care about the past. At this 
juncture in history, it was by no means clear how future generations of Germans (and others) 
would later remember, narrate, and make sense of the war and the unprecedented destruction and 
suffering it brought upon the world. In spite of the vacuum of meaning Germans found 
themselves in there was not a situation in which the Allies could have simply impressed lessons 
and memories on the mind of the German public. Much depended on how Germans themselves 
would begin to represent and remember their past, including their own experiences during the 
war.  

Let us look first at the example of the port city of Hamburg and the evolving collective 

memory of its bombing. Hamburg suffered one of the most devastating air raids in the entire war 
on Nazi Germany when the British Bomber Command under General Sir Arthur Harris launched 
“Operation Gomorrah” on July 24, 1943. This attack consisted of a coordinated series of “city-
busting” night raids, which were supplemented by a smaller number of US Air Force daylight 
raids against shipyards and submarine pens. Altogether, more than thirty-four thousand people 
were killed within a couple of days (Thiessen 2007: 12). 

Explicitly taking issue with Sebald, the young German historian Malte Thiessen has 

demonstrated that the postwar memory of the bombing raids, far from being suppressed, served 
in fact as an important symbolic resource for recreating a new sense of togetherness and local 
pride among the citizens of Hamburg. While immediately after the war even democratically 
elected officials continued to use Nazi propaganda terms such as “air terror [Luftterror]” 
(Thiessen 2007: 98) to characterize the bombings, the perpetrator-centered frame was quickly 
replaced by an almost exclusive focus on victims. From early on, political representatives from 
all parties, including the Communist Party, called for mourning a generously defined group of 
victims which included all the civilians killed by bombs, but also German soldiers and the 
inmates of Hamburg’s concentration camp in Neuengamme, where many more people were 
killed than in Operation Gomorrah (about fifty thousand). Significantly, this emotional and 
semantic shift from the accusation of perpetrators to the mourning of victims was in no way 
driven by the British occupying forces in Hamburg, although the German desire to regain a 
minimum of recognition and good will from their former enemies played a role (Thiessen 2007: 
176-77).148 What is also important is that most Hamburgers did not harbor any resentment 
toward Britons, a fact that was already noted by Nossack, who was an eyewitness to the air raids 
                                                 
148 On this subject of “memory diplomacy” see Etheridge (2008), who focuses on private and public actors in both 
West Germany and the United States in the 1950s, and their converging interests in constructing favorable 
“prosthetic” memories of Germany. 

 

164

(Nossack 2004: 34; see also Evans 2009: 466). A perpetrator-centered framing of the bombings 
would therefore not have resonated with the public. 

At the local level at least, a vibrant culture of remembrance emerged that garnered 

significant public attention. Unsurprisingly, the early memory of the air war was constructed in 
such a way as to suppress simmering collective feelings of guilt. Germans defined themselves as 
victims not just of the bombing assault and other horrors, but also as victims of the “hypnotic 
influence” of Hitler, as a former mayor of Hamburg has put it (quoted in Thiessen 2007: 109). 
What is indeed surprising and unsettling is that apparently there has not been a one-directional 
movement toward enlarging the circle of victims to be mourned. Thiessen (2007: 173-74) shows 
that until 1950 the inmates of Neuengamme, many of whom were shot, starved to death or send 
to extermination camps in the east, were included in various commemorative performances and 
discourses, whereas later only German city dwellers were considered worth the tears and 
thoughts of Germans. This narrowing of the collective memory can be described as a 
consequence of the early cold war, which led to the marginalization of communist groups, who 
after the war had played a crucial role in keeping the memory of the concentration camps alive, 
although without any reference to what was later called the Holocaust. 

The cold war pattern of remembering with its heavy emphasis on local bombing victims 
combined with an inhibition to discuss the motives and strategies of those who were in charge of 
the air war changed with the rise of a new generation that no longer had any direct experience of 
the bombings. The new “generational memory” (Eyerman 2002: 11) began to crystallize in the 
early 1970s. For the first time, officials interpreted the bombing of their city not in the context of 
the “collapse” of the Third Reich, but as a harbinger of the “liberation” of Germany (Thiessen 
2007: 203, 388). This new moral term immediately brought back the memory of Neuengamme, a 
memory which at that time was already embedded in a much broader narrative about the 
Holocaust. The Holocaust as a defining memory icon and signifier for what Theodor Adorno 
(1998: 89) characterized as “a horror that one hesitates to call … by name” emerged in West 
Germany only in the course of the 1970s.149 Once established, the Holocaust narrative and the 
narrative of the liberation of Germany by the Allies reinforced each other, forming a new web of 
meaning.  

In Hamburg, this shift in the mode of remembrance was to a large extent spearheaded by 

the regional Evangelical Lutheran Church whose leading representatives tried to marry two 
different narratives. The first insisted on the innocence of the German bombing victims who 
were described as having been sacrificed and even “crucified,” as the Austrian artist Oskar 
Kokoschka said, who contributed a mosaic (“Ecce Homines“) to the St Nikolai Church memorial 
in Hamburg (Thiessen 2007: 230). The second narrative represents German civilians not merely 
as victims, but also as (knowing or unknowing) accomplices to the evil that ruled Germany. In a 
speech given on the occasion of the inauguration of the memorial in 1977, the bishop of 
Hamburg reminded the audience of a plaque hanging at some distance from Kokoschka mosaic. 
The plaque reads: “Open your mouth for the mute, for the rights of all the unfortunate” (Proverbs 
31, 8). Germans, the bishop continued, did not heed the call and ignored the plight of “those 
people for which we did not open our mouth” (quoted in Thiessen 2007: 232). This way of 
                                                 
149 The Auschwitz trials in Frankfurt in 1963-65 focused the attention of the public more on the perpetrators than the 
victims. Michal Bodemann (2002) has argued that a major turning point in the perception of the Jews was the Six 
Day War in 1967 during which many Germans, including the media, sided with Israel. The Jewish state was 
compared to Prussia, and citizens in Hamburg, for example, donated blood for Israeli soldiers (see Bodemann 2002: 
48-49). 

 

165

interpreting the past gave a new twist to the perception of the bombings as some kind of divine 
“punishment,” – a perception that was already prevalent among some eyewitnesses (Nossack 
2004: 12-14). 

Occasionally, this dual innovation of representing the perpetrators of the air war as also 

being liberators, and the victims as also being accomplices of the same forces Germany had to be 
liberated from, took the form of what we have called the just-war position. For instance, in 1993 
the editor of the influential liberal weekly Die Zeit, Gerd Bucerius, described his jubilant mood 
at the sight and sound of the bomber squadrons. “‘Finally,’ I kept shouting, ‘finally.’ In my view, 
the Allied had waited much too long before battling the world’s enemy Hitler” (quoted in 
Thiessen 2007: 327). To be true, this was quite an exceptional statement that did not resonate 
with many in Bucerius’ generation. To the contrary, the new mode of remembering the war 
tended to alienate sections of the older generations of Hamburgers, some of which voiced their 
anger and bitterness in the local media (Thiessen 2007: 334). While these voices were losing 
influence in the ongoing memory struggles, other voices made sure that the bombing-as-
liberation narrative began to slowly disintegrate. At no point, however, did this disintegration 
affect the memory of the Holocaust which was rather increasingly consolidated as iconic and 
indisputable. Until the late 1980s we still find the vocabulary of liberation in the official 
language, usually attenuated by what we have identified as the moderate anti-Machiavellian 
position. Yet throughout these years the liberation motif had to compete with a radicalization of 
anti-Machiavellian positions whose advocates claimed that the air war was not an immoral 
means to a moral end, but did not contribute at all to the moral end of defeating Nazi Germany 
(see Thiessen 2007: 272-73, 400, 406).  

As a result of these trends, the post-reunification period after 1990 offers a mixed picture. 

Partly in response to the contextualization of the air war and the enlargement of the circle of 
victims who have been included in the collective memory, public intellectuals and the media 
rediscovered the “taboo” on remembering German bombing victims. Since then, the term 
“taboo” has been used in different ways. Some usages are benign. Sebald, for example, only 
wanted writers to express themselves in an adequate language, and the public to be aware of the 
horrible things that happened on the ground as a result of the bombings (people getting stuck in 
the melting tar while trying to run away from the firestorm, etc.). More often, however, the 
interjection of “taboo” into controversies over collective memory is an expression of resentment 
against the inclusion of non-German victims in the collective memory, and a response to the 
growing difficulties of constructing an imagined homogeneous community of victims out of the 
ruins left behind by the Royal Air Force. 

Furthermore, the “taboo” vocabulary is paralleled by a return of the “terror” vocabulary. 
This is a direct consequence of the radicalization of the anti-Machiavellian position toward the 
bombing war. Once it is believed that the bombings did not serve any intelligible military 
purpose, the term “terror” is bound to seep back into public discourse. The terror vocabulary is 
also a response to the consolidation of the Holocaust trauma which has made it even less 
legitimate to criticize the ultimate goal of Allied war effort than in the first decades after the war. 
Once the Holocaust was memorialized as “sacred-evil” (Alexander 2003: 50), victory over its 
perpetrators became sacred too. Thus, if Germans wish to avoid being symbolically polluted by 
the evil of the Holocaust, they have to phrase their opposition to the war by rejecting the means 
chosen by the Allies, or by questioning the relations of means and ends. This is precisely what 
happened in the 1980s in Hamburg’s tabloid papers and later in national mainstream media such 
as the news magazine Der Spiegel which in January 2003 published a series of articles on the 

 

166

 

The Air War as Bridging Metaphor 

“terror attacks against Germany,” calling the assaults on Hamburg and Dresden “climaxes of 
Luftterror” (Thiessen 2007: 400-1). 

Although these terms are taken straight out of the dictionary of the Nazi Ministry of 

Propaganda, we wish to emphasize that the recent critique of the Allied “air terror” has 
undergone a largely successful process of semantic de-Nazification in the sense that it is no 
longer part of a strategy to create a harmonious community of heroic sufferers based on the 
radical exclusion of the Other. The indictment of the Western Allies as perpetrators of terror 
attacks has not weakened the desire of the city of Hamburg, the vast majority of Germans and 
mainstream media to be on most friendly terms with the alleged perpetrator nations, and to be 
recognized as a member in good standing of the Western Alliance and the European Union. The 
return of a perpetrator-centered frame focusing on the “terror” spread by the Allies did not, for 
example, affect the planning for the fiftieth anniversary of Operation Gomorrah in 1994, which 
was organized in close coordination with the British Ambassador to Germany in a “spirit of 
peace, reconciliation and friendship,” as the mayor of Hamburg was eager to emphasize. When 
Prince Charles of Wales gave an appropriately fair-minded and conciliatory speech at the 
commemoration, about thirty thousand enthusiastic Hamburgers gathered to celebrate him, 
waving small Union Jack flags and wearing “Prince Charles” buttons (Thiessen 2007: 372-74).  

Over the last decades, the Allied bombing war on German cities became included in the 
national and collective memory as a horrific and evil event whose relation to the morally worthy 
ends of the war remains controversial. The moral content of the bombing symbol is thus still 
contested. Scholars and citizens continue to debate whether the bombings were a necessary evil 
or a crime, and whether it happened to innocents or to bystanders and accomplices to another 
horrific and evil event, which is the Holocaust. There is a much controversy about the ranking of 
evils: for most Germans the air war, unlike the Holocaust, is far from achieving the status of a 
sacred evil. Still, even as a comparatively weak symbol of evil the bombings serve a moral 
function. Whenever the media report about the air bombing of other places in other wars, 
Germans tend to respond to such cues by remembering the bombing of their own cities. The 
German perception of the 1991 Second Persian Gulf War, code-named “Operation Desert 
Storm,” is a case in point.  

When the US-led coalition launched a massive air campaign against Iraq on January 17, 
1991, many Germans drew an analogy between Germany’s past and Iraq’s present. For instance, 
visitors to the town of Giessen near Frankfurt (where one of the authors of this paper happened 
to study at that time) could see messages sprayed on official city signs that read “Giessen = 
Baghdad.” During World War II, Giessen offered many industrial targets and was an important 
link in the German transport system, which is the reason why the city was bombed and almost 
completely destroyed on the night of December 6, 1944, by American B-17 bombers. 

The sprayed message in Giessen was symptomatic for a much broader phenomenon that 

was new at least in the Western part of the country. Several voices from the peace movement 
against the Gulf War employed allusions to the German experience of being bombed by the 
Western Allies as a “bridging metaphor” (Alexander 2003: 67-76) to make sense of and mobilize 
against the Iraq war. There had of course been other American air wars before, most notably the 
Vietnam War, which was also opposed on a global scale. However the public controversy over 
the Vietnam War unfolded without any appropriation of specifically German war memories. 
Indeed, the perception of this particular war was still (or already) shaped by the fundamental 

 

167

perpetrator/liberator ambiguity that was about to dominate the public discourse on the World 
War II bombings of German cities. Artworks such as Wolf Vostell’s Pop-art collage “Lipstick 
bomber” gave expression to this ambiguity which was later completely erased by the German 
peace movement. 

 
[insert “Lipstick bomber”] 
 
Voices from the peace movement of the early 1990s varied considerably with regard to 

their level of reflexivity and elaborateness, and did by no means amount to a coherent ideological 
position. Still, in hindsight the peace movement turned out to be a political actor whose 
contribution to the ongoing process of German memory-making has been much more salient than 
its effects on global politics, although spokespersons of the movement attempted to combine 
precisely these two areas. The popular psychoanalyst Horst-Eberhard Richter, for example, 
argued that Germany had a special right and duty to push for strictly pacifist policies in the 
international arena because this country had been the source as well as the site of mass atrocities 
during World War II. Although the bombing of German cities did not figure explicitly in his 
argument, Richter gave a telling list of impressions about what he perceived to be the immediate 
results of the Gulf War: “The enormity of the sacrifice in blood of soldiers and civilians, the 
misery of those who have been bombed out as well of hundreds of thousands of refugees, the 
destruction of cities and the landscape, the poisoning of the sea and the toxic oil well plumes 
engulfing hundreds of kilometers“ (Richter 1991: 15). Reading such descriptions it is hard to 
miss the vague similarity with accounts of what happened to Germany during World War II. This 
vagueness and ambiguity of Richter’s lament was symptomatic for many other texts published in 
the context of the peace movement at that time. 

What is most striking in Richter’s account is the blurring of the distinction between 

victims and perpetrators in the context of the Holocaust and World War II. On the one hand, he 
clearly distances himself from any attempt to questioning the historical guilt and the political 
responsibility of Germans for the Holocaust; on the other hand he uses German war memories to 
seize the moral high ground for Germany as an international actor. Because Germans have 
suffered so much, so the argument goes, they are uniquely well-positioned to speak up against 
any war, whereas those who have suffered less are still caught up in nationalist and militaristic 
mindsets. From the memories of German suffering and victimhood Richter distils a spirit of 
moral superiority that distinguishes Germany from other, allegedly more traditional nations. The 
implication of this rhetorical move is that the blurring of the line between victims and 
perpetrators is matched by an equally problematic blurring of “temporal and spatial boundaries,” 
as Andreas Huyssen (2003: 163) has pointed out. Like many other Germans, members of the 
peace movement continued to define their identity largely in temporal terms, based on the 
difference between the democratic present and an ominous, highly charged, anti-democratic past. 
At the same time, however, this repudiation of the past was spatialized and turned into a 
rejection of contemporary nations such as, in particular, the United States of America.150 
                                                 
150 The arbitrariness of these rhetorical stances became obvious when in 1999 the German government successfully 
enacted a reversal of the analogical framework introduced by the peace movement by deciding to join the Kosovo 
intervention on the ground that Serbia was planning a “second Auschwitz” against Kosovo Albanians. Here again 
we saw the spatial localization of an evil retrieved from the collective memory and projected onto a real place which 
then was bombed by the German Air Force and others (see Heins 2007). 

 

168

Our reading of the ambiguities of the German peace movement was already reflected by 

some of the protagonists themselves who felt that the movement was maneuvering in murky 
waters. Thus, Jörn Böhme, who had been an activist of the peace movement in the 1980s, argued 
that the attitudes of the German left, and in particular the peace movement, during the Gulf War 
were fraught with “dilemmas” (Böhme 1991: 215) of the kind discussed above. Every attempt to 
define an unambiguous pacifist position in Germany, Böhme argued, was marred by an 
unconscious desire to escape those dilemmas. While mapping out a complex field of mutually 
contradictory loyalties and self-canceling positions, he also mentioned the memory of the air 
war, wondering “to what extent the bombing of Dresden and other cities has been tabooed 
among young Germans, on the ground that the older generation used Dresden to repress 
Auschwitz, with the consequence that now perhaps the lack of mourning is projected collectively 
on the people of Iraq as an innocent victim of ‘the Allies’” (Böhme 1991: 223). Similarly, Gert 
Schäfer interpreted the discourse of the peace movement in terms of a “return of the repressed.“ 
In a much-quoted essay he noted that “after a long time I heard once again every single air plane, 
a noise that is normally submerged in the sounds of everyday life. Memories of bombers and 
attacks by low-flying aircraft returned, memories of nights spent in bomb shelters, of fires, 
debris, dead people and my child gas mask” (Schäfer 1992: 9). It is important to stress that both 
Böhme and Schäfer talk about the memories of the bombings in strictly psychological, non-
constructivist terms of a “return of the repressed.” This is significant because the intrusion of 
bombing memories into the public discourse it not described as the result of a lifting of a 
communicative taboo, but as the result of an allegedly natural psychic dynamic. 

We reject this interpretation as much as we have rejected the taboo thesis. As far as the 
public sphere is concerned, memories of the bombing of German cities did not “return” like a 
jack-in-the-box jumping at us. Rather, these memories were consciously revived by activists, 
although under inherited symbolic circumstances shaped by previous memory projects. In the 
early 1980s, for example, activists and the media began to circulate the slogan of the “nuclear 
holocaust” (Thiessen 2007: 256) to associate the memory of the destruction of Hamburg and 
other cities with two other evils at once: the cold war threat of nuclear war, and the systematic 
extermination of the European Jews captured by the rising Holocaust symbol. In this case the 
resurrection of the memory of the air war was short-lived: it vanished together with the Soviet 
Union and the cold war constellation, which again makes clear that it is misleading to speak of a 
past forcing itself onto the present.  

We conclude that Dan Diner (1991) was probably right when he interpreted the protests 

against the Gulf War as an expression of both continuity and change in the parameters of 
political protest in post-reunification Germany. On the one hand, he commended the peace 
movement, not the least for the ability of some of its representatives to reflect upon the 
movement’s inherent anti-American ideological grounding. On the other hand, he was concerned 
about what began to take shape as an effort to mobilize memories of German victimhood in the 
protest against the US campaign in Iraq, a campaign that should have been judged and criticized 
on its own terms. In 1990 and 1991 this mobilization was still very much dominated by the 
ideological debates within the West German left and the peace movement that grew out of it 
(Böhme 1991; Kloke 2007). Twelve years later, on the occasion of the protests against yet 
another US-led war in Iraq, however, the memory symbol of “Dresden” could no longer be 
found occupying a particular position at one end of the ideological left-right spectrum. In 
hindsight, the German peace movement has indeed earned the dubious credit of having turned 
the bombing war on Germany into a free-floating symbol that allowed the public to understand 

 

169

and rally against the successors of the same Allies which had devastated, but also liberated 
Germany in World War II.  

At the same time, though, this symbol, precisely because it is free-floating, should not be 
regarded as pointing toward an underlying cultural trauma, because it is not really connected to 
issues of collective identity. Memories can be mobilized in conflicts over the self-definition of 
the collectivity as well as referred to in struggles over resources that have no inner connection to 
the issues resurrected from memory (Langenohl 2001). Although most conflicts over memory 
have both a strategic and an identity dimension, from the point of view of cultural trauma theory 
the crucial question is whether memory offers a narrative that is directed toward the in-group in 
such a way as to shape its collective identity (Eyerman 2002: 70). If that is not the case, a 
memory may still serve as a symbolic capital of sorts that is used to win over an audience for a 
particular cause. The “achievement” of the peace movement has been the creation of a token of 
symbolic capital out of the memory of the bombings which now can be used for the public 
dramatization of issues and for adding moral weight to political arguments and positions, but 
which cannot be regarded as having any identity-constitutive meaning of its own.  

 

Dresden and the Clash of Memories 

More consequential for German memory struggles than any American-led war in recent 

decades has been the reunification of Germany itself. To be sure, this event did not 
fundamentally reconfigure what we have called the bombing war memory matrix. In fact, the 
institutionalization of the Holocaust trauma continued. More memorials to Nazi crimes were 
unveiled, the most spectacular of them being the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe in 
central Berlin which was inaugurated and opened to the public in 2005. Also, empirical research 
shows that contemporary Germans of all age groups continue to identify Nazism with evil and 
recognize the Holocaust as “the superlative historical genocide” (Langenbacher 2008: 65). At the 
same time, however, the inclusion of the former German Democratic Republic strengthened 
certain forces and trends that were already visible in West Germany. In the communist East, the 
memory of the bombing war was omnipresent and consciously evoked by the state. Many cities 
bore the scars of the war into the 1980s, with wastelands of rubble and facades of buildings 
pockmarked by bullet holes that served as constant reminders of the past. While the relative 
slowness of reconstruction made sure that popular war memories would linger on, the official 
public discourse politicized those memories in accordance with the binary cold war logic. 

From the mid-1950s onward the East German discourse on the bombing of Germany 

focused on the eastern city of Dresden which was destroyed on February 13 and 14, 1945, by a 
highly controversial air campaign called “Operation Thunderclap.” The bombing of Dresden was 
the most catastrophic attack on a German city since Hamburg. Twenty-five thousand people 
were killed, most of them in the first two out of three night raids carried out by British bombers. 
Dresden had been a city that prided itself for her rich culture, but also a Nazi stronghold and an 
important hub for moving military personnel and supplies to the east. Because of its strategic 
position, the campaign was planned in London as a way to ease the Red Army’s advance in 
Germany (Taylor 2004: 190-92). However, from our perspective, the most interesting aspect of 
this unforgotten campaign does not lie in such empirical details. The intriguing phenomenon is 
rather that the bombing almost instantly morphed from a military fact into a powerful moral 
signifier of evil. As the British historian Frederick Taylor (2004: 372) writes, the destruction of 
Dresden began “to exercise an independent power of its own, one that could not but affect the 
Allies’ claims to absolute moral superiority.” According to Taylor, this transformation must 

 

170

partly be credited to the efforts of Joseph Goebbels and his Ministry of Propaganda that lost no 
time manipulating the figure of dead (by adding a zero) and denouncing the raids as a 
“barbarian” terror attack on an innocent city that represented the epitome of European “culture” 
without having any military value. 

Much of this straightforward coding of the events survived the end of Nazism with only 
minor permutations. Intellectuals and the government of East Germany offered a narrative of the 
bombing of Dresden that was based on a small set of symbolic equivalences between the 
National Socialism and the Western Allies. The perpetrators of the bombings were analogically 
associated with the Nazis, and victims were represented in analogy to the victims of Nazism 
(although the Jews were not named). East Germans also perpetuated the myth of the innocence 
of Dresden as a place of no military or industrial importance where people loved the arts and 
kept themselves aloof from the demands of politics. Hence the trope of the “senselessness” of the 
air raids (see, e.g., Kil 1989: 19). For cold war propaganda purposes the attackers were also 
called “Anglo-Americans,” although in this particular case the US Air Force had only been a 
junior partner in a largely British and Commonwealth operation. However, the role of the United 
States was seen as particularly frightening in light of the even worse fate that could have befallen 
Dresden: becoming the target of the first atomic bomb. According to a widely believed story line 
offered by communist party intellectuals, this possibility was thwarted only by the fast advancing 
Red Army, which saved the people of Dresden. Although empirically unsubstantiated, this 
doomsday scenario became a center piece of the East German collective memory of the air war 
(Taylor 2004: 454-56; Widera 2005).  

In short, the East German discourse lifted the assault on Dresden out of the overall 
context of the war, invested it with immense moral significance and created a salvationary 
narrative that idolized the Red Army while polluting the British and American air forces as 
apocalyptically evil. 

    Anglo-American air forces 
    Perpetrators 
    Barbarism 
    Capitalism 
    war mongering 
    threatening annihilation 

 
Dresden 
 
Victim  
 
Culture 
 
Communism 
 
peace loving    
saved by Red Army 
 
After reunification, this narrative entered the mainstream of German public culture, 
where some of its aspects such as the savior role attributed to the Soviet Union have been 
submerged, while other aspects have affected the collective memory. It is worth noting, though, 
that the East German discourse did not contradict the core assumption of the West German 
memory matrix that Germany had to be liberated by foreign armies. On the other hand, the 
Holocaust did not figure prominently, if at all, in East German memory. The place of the sacred-
evil remained empty in East Germany, even if the communist propaganda tried for some time to 
assign this place to the imperialist West. Yet this assignment was predicated on the changing 
geopolitical situation and was thus inherently unstable.151 The atomic bomb also might have 
been a candidate, but since the Soviet Union also maintained a considerable nuclear arsenal, only 
                                                 
151 As the cold war was winding down in the 1980s, East German historians like Olaf Groehler softened their 
critique of the Allied bombing considerably (see Fox 2006). 

 

171

the actual dropping of two bombs by the US Air Force over Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 
1945 could be referred to as epitomizing modern evil. This, however, was a much weaker 
d 
symbol than the Holocaust, and did not lead to consequential institutional changes in society an
state. The survivors of the nuclear attack were not supported in any concrete way nor did Japan 
as a victim nation play a particular role in communist foreign policy. East Germany is also not 
known for ever having opposed nuclear weapon

s as such. 

If East German public discourses after reunification did not radically disrupt the matrix 
underlying the remembrance of the bombing war, how did they affect collective memory and 
practices of commemoration as well as the chances for constructing a cultural trauma? To find a 
preliminary answer, we now turn briefly to the ways in which the destruction of Dresden has 
been commemorated in recent times in Dresden itself. 

After reunification, both Dresden and the province of Saxony, of which Dresden is the 

regional capital city, were governed by the liberal-conservative Christian Democratic Party 
(CDU). The new ruling political elite was, of course, determined to promote reconciliation with 
the West, and made sure that the annual commemoration was organized and scripted 
accordingly. One of the early steps taken by the city of Dresden was the decision of reconstruct 
the eighteenth-century Lutheran Frauenkirche (Church of Our Lady). This decision was 
controversial because the heap of ruins to which the cathedral had been reduced by the 1945 air 
raids was conserved under communist rule as a war memorial, similar to the ruins of Coventry 
Cathedral in England which was destroyed by German bombers. Supporters of the 
reconstruction, who were aware that the removal of the ruins would be interpreted by some as a 
“sacrilege” (Blaschke 1990), nevertheless argued that it was more important to allow people to 
forget and to leave behind the horrors of the past of which the dark stones of the ruins were a 
vivid reminder. 

Today, the reopened cathedral is being touted by German as well as British 

representatives as a transnational symbol of “reconciliation” between former enemies. 
“Reconciliation” is indeed one of the key words of a commemorative discourse that no longer 
differs significantly from the discourse on the bombing of Hamburg. In both cities we have seen 
two different narratives of the air war in recent years, one that describes the air raids as a symbol 
of the madness of war in general, or even as a symbol of the destructiveness of modernity as 
such. A former mayor of Dresden, for example, used the rhetorical device of metonymy to 
contextualize the memory of the bombing. The attack on Dresden was said to be “senseless” and 
“barbarian,” but no more senseless and barbarian than “the entire war,” which was started by 
Germany before taking on a life of its own.152 This narrative amalgamates the different tactics 
and strategies used by the Allied and the Axis Powers, as well as their human consequences, into 
one single emblem of absurdity. In 2005, the city held an event where messages written by 
victims of war from Dresden, Baghdad, Guernica, New York, Hiroshima, Grozny and other 
places were read out in public to evoke the idea of a global “community of victims.” Around the 
same time, the mayor of Hamburg gave a commemorative speech in which he interpreted the 
firebombing of his city not as a consequence of decisions taken by countries which had been 
attacked before, but as the result of a breach of “the dams of our civilization” that led Europe to 
abandon herself to the destructive potentials of technology and modernity (quoted in Thiessen 
2007: 421-22; for the “dams of civilization” metaphor see Freud 1905: 178). To the extent that it 
 
                                                
152 Address by Ingolf Rossberg, Dresden, February 13, 2006 (on file with authors). 

 

172

radically downplays the role of agency and responsibility in modern society, this narrative could 
be called postmodern. 

At the same time, there is a second narrative centered on the conviction that historical 

occurrences such as the bombing of cities should be explained not as expressions of a self-
propelling modernity that got out of control, but as consequences of motivated human action. 
Since the 1980s much of the memory work done in Hamburg, for example, has been inspired by 
a causal story which regarded Nazi Germany as the source of a violence that finally 
boomeranged. Hosea 8, 7—“For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind”—
was therefore a much quoted reference. This way of distributing causal and moral responsibilities 
across different actors is by no means alien to the public discourse in Dresden. In February 2009, 
Helma Orosz, who had been elected mayor only a few months ago, addressed a crowd at the city 
center emphasizing that “Like Dresden, thousands of other human places had to sink to ashes 
before the criminal Nazi racket that started the war could be stopped.”153 The day before, she 
gave a speech at the Heidefriedhof (Heath Cemetery) in Dresden where many of the remains of 
the bombing victims are buried, insisting that “It was Germany who forced the nations attacked 
by her to fight back in a life and death struggle.”154 Other representatives of the city have called 
upon the citizens to remember their former Jewish fellow-citizens who were persecuted and 
deported from Dresden like everywhere else in German-ruled territories. Recalling specifically 
the fate of Victor Klemperer, a Jewish citizen and professor of literature who survived the Nazi 
period in hiding, former mayor Lutz Vogel mentioned that Klemperer had barely escaped 
Hitler’s henchmen: “The air raid on February 13, 1945, had saved his life!”155 Civic groups 
including a survivors’ association have also invoked the double image of German civilians as 
victims/accomplices, which corresponds to the perpetrator/liberator ambiguity in the perception 
of the Allies including their bomber pilots.156 

The crucial difference between East and West, Dresden and Hamburg, can be gleaned 

from the fact that there is virtually no commemorative speech by a democratic politician in 
Dresden that does not address the pervasive counter-discourse produced by extreme right-wing 
groups in society and their political parties. At the heart of this memory discourse is no longer 
what Adorno (1998: 90) ridiculed as the “quite common move of drawing up a balance sheet of 
guilt …, as though Dresden compensated for Auschwitz.” Instead of only minimizing the 
Holocaust by pointing to alleged crimes of the Allies, the new revisionist discourse directly 
analogizes “Dresden” to the Holocaust by calling the Allied bombing of German cities a 
“bombing holocaust.” This new trope has the advantage of not denying the Holocaust (which is a 
criminal offense in Germany) but rather treating it as a floating signifier that becomes truly 
meaningful only when attached to the memories of the air war. The career of the “bombing 
holocaust” trope can partly be traced back to Jörg Friedrich’s bestselling book The Fire: The 
Bombing of Germany, 1940-1945, in which the author establishes two equivalences: he calls the 
British Bomber Command and the aircrews dropping bombs over Germany “Einsatzgruppen“—
the official name of the German death squads who rounded up and killed Jews and other groups 
                                                 
153 Speech by Helma Orosz, Altmarkt Dresden, February 14, 2009 (on file with authors). 
154 Speech by Helma Orosz, Heidefriedhof Dresden, February 13, 2009 (on file with authors). 
155 Speech by Lutz Vogel, First Mayor, Neumarkt Dresden, February 13, 2008 (on file with authors). 
156 “At the same time the history of the city shows the co-responsibility also of the citizens of Dresden for the 
inhumane, criminal policies of the National Socialist power holders,” says the mission statement of a group of local 
history activists called “13 February 1945.” 

 

173

throughout Europe; and he equates the basements where people died during the air attacks 
“crematoria” (Friedrich 2006). Still, Friedrich does not see himself as a right-wing author. He 
believes that the Allied air war was a unique crime and should not be compared to more recent 
American wars. Thus, while drawing an analogy between the Holocaust—the systematic 
extermination of a people which was stigmatized as biologically defective and born evil—and 
military actions that were (rightly or wrongly) believed to contribute to the defeat of the regime 
responsible for the Holocaust, Friedrich dissociates other, more recent bombing campaigns from 
the one launched against Germany. Unlike both the peace movement and right-wing extremists 
who use the bombing memory as a tool to mobilize people against other wars fought by 
Germany’s former enemies, Friedrich mentions that he even supported the 2003 war in Iraq (see 
the “Afterword for American and British Readers” in Friedrich 2006: 483). 

 
[insert photos “bombing holocaust” etc] 
 
The right-wing manner of remembrance is passionately rejected by the democratic 
political parties as polluting the founding ideals of reunified Germany, but also of its newly 
democratized eastern provinces. It is seen as “disgracing” Dresden and “sullying the memory of 
its dead.”157 At the same time, local activists admit that the right-wing memory project resonates 
with sections of the people in Dresden. Whereas in Hamburg we have seen a notable decline of 
public controversies over the meaning of the air raids on the city as well as over the appropriate 
mode of remembering them (Thiessen 2007: 457), Dresden has become a veritable cauldron of 
memory wars. In 2009, the annual “commemorative march” organized by local right-wing 
extremists attracted more than 6,000 like-minded people from all over Germany and some 
neighboring countries. Even official events held by the city of Dresden are dominated by these 
groups. Their countless wreaths, for example, completely drown out the wreaths laid by ordinary 
citizens or German and British dignitaries at the Heath Cemetery. In the past, some invited 
British guests like the historian Frederick Taylor had to be protected by security guards while 
others, for example the Holocaust survivor Ruth Kluger, who is a former professor at the 
University of California, declined an invitation explaining that she could handle a bunch of right-
wing hecklers but not the sight of thousands of neo-Nazis marching on German streets. 
Unsurprisingly, this disturbing situation has triggered a cycle of counter-mobilizations by left-
wing radicals who have begun to stage their own performances on the occasion of the 
anniversary of the bombings. Some of these groups adopt a provocative, almost carnivalesque 
version of the just-war position that is perhaps best illustrated by the slogan “Bomber Harris 
Superstar—Thanks to You from the Red Antifa [Antifascist Action].” 

 
[insert photo] 
 
It is easy to understand why none of the actors involved in the annual Dresden bombing 

remembrance spectacle achieves what Alexander (2004) calls a “fused performance,” which 
would be characterized by the presence an audience identifying with the actors and by cultural 
scripts appearing to be true. Understandably, many citizens simply stay physically away from a 
scene dominated by radical memory activists from the opposite ends of the political spectrum, 
monitored by helicopters hovering over the city and kept in check by thousands of police officers 
                                                 
157 Speech by Helma Orosz, Heidefriedhof Dresden, February 13, 2009 (on file with authors). 

 

174

in riot gear. The mayor of the city of Dresden has meanwhile organized a dialogue with citizens 
about how future commemorations of the past should look like in a situation where there is little 
consensus neither about the symbolic text of the commemoration nor about the ways of 
transforming this text into a convincing and effective performance. Nothing could be more 
different from this situation of utter cluelessness than the state of affairs in Hamburg where the 
memory of Operation Gomorrah has been “normalized” (Thiessen 2007: 457) and drained of 
explosive emotions. 

 

Toward a New Cultural Trauma? 

We wish to summarize the findings of our case study with a view to some of the more 

general issues in the debate on cultural trauma. The Allied bombing of Germany offers an 
interesting test case for cultural trauma theory. The bombings clearly represent a historical 
instance of massive collective suffering that was deliberately inflicted on civilians by identifiable 
actors. There is no question that these occurrences have been traumatic in the clinical and 
psychological sense of the term. Still, memory projects attempting to translate this original 
experience into a cultural trauma have failed. The remembrance of the destruction of Hamburg, 
Dresden and many other German cities and towns does not point to an underlying cultural 
trauma that fundamentally shapes the collective identity of modern-day Germans. Rather, the 
memory of the bombing war is a function of another memory: the memory of Germany’s 
wartime atrocities including the Holocaust. 

This does not mean that the Holocaust memory has “repressed” that of the air war or put 
a “taboo” on it. Not only have images of the bombings and their human consequences “crossed 
the threshold of the national consciousness” (Sebald 2004: 11); today they are now in fact deeply 
ingrained in the political culture. Our point, however, is that the meaning of the bombing war for 
the nation cannot be established independently from memory discourses on the crimes of Nazi 
Germany. The public discourse on the bombings is not about the obvious fact that Germans, too, 
have been victims of the war; it is rather about whether they deserve a place in the sun of 
virtuous victimhood which would rule out that they have been perpetrators or accomplices to evil 
as well. Whenever Germans during World War II are obliquely represented as virtuous victims, 
we do not witness a return of repressed memories, but a strategy to exonerate Germans from 
their responsibility for the Third Reich. 

Not the memory of the air war, but the memory of the Holocaust is a cultural trauma for 

Germans (like for others). This social fact in turn constrains and conditions present and future 
memory projects. The memory matrix of the bombings is thus organized around a reference 
point external to the debate over the bombings. Political struggles over the public 
commemoration of the bombing victims, including all the historically incomprehensible 
analogies between “Dresden” and “Baghdad,” always take place in the shadow of the Holocaust 
as the negative foundational myth of contemporary Germany. 

A cultural trauma serves as filter and organizing center of political perceptions and value-
statements which in turn fuel processes of collective mobilization and identity construction. Far 
from being such a symbolic resource, the memory of the air war in Germany has been more of a 
ghost light in an ideological swamp. Of course, there is nothing about this memory that makes it 
impossible to reconstruct the facts of German suffering in such a way as to initiate a cultural 
trauma process. Alexander overrates the importance of the fact that by winning the war the Allies 
gained control over the “means of symbolic production” (Alexander 2003: 32-33) so that they 
could portray the existence of German-controlled extermination camps in a certain fashion. For 

 

175

the Allied victory did in no way guarantee that one day West Germans would accept the 
Holocaust as a defining national memory icon. Nor is there any transcendental guarantee—given 
that the means of symbolic production are quite evenly distributed today—that Germans (or 
others) will one day abandon this particular memory. However, the obstacles are formidable.  
Let us look at the example of the “bombing holocaust.” Apart from being obscene, this 

fairly successful trope highlights the fact that the same groups who deny or minimize the 
Holocaust have to refer to and affirm the Holocaust as sacred-evil in order to denounce the 
bombing of German cities. The much less extreme example of Friedrich’s The Fire also shows 
that even a drastic and simplified account of Germans as innocent victims of evil perpetrators 
draws its persuasive power from the Holocaust narrative. Far from making a first step toward 
replacing or eroding this foundational narrative, Friedrich has actually strengthened what will 
remain for a long time the central symbol of evil in the Western world.  

Obstacles to constructing a new cultural trauma abound as we move from the margins to 

the center of the public debate. A cultural trauma “demands reparation” (Eyerman 2008: 163). 
Thus, if the memory of the air war ever crystallized into a cultural trauma, Britain and, to a lesser 
extent, the United States would have to repair the damage, starting perhaps with a formal 
apology. But there is evidence that the refusal of British officials including Queen Elizabeth II to 
apologize for any bombing raid has not caused more than a minor and passing public outcry, not 
even in Dresden (Taylor 2004: 422). The situation is further complicated by the fact that leading 
German military historians such as Rolf-Dieter Müller have publicly argued that an “admission 
of guilt” on the part of Great Britain would be inappropriate; according to him, we should rather 
be “grateful” for the Allied war effort (Müller 2004: 230). The public debate about whether the 
area bombing was a “necessary” evil (given the imperative of defeating Nazi Germany) or a 
“lesser” evil (compared to a nuclear attack) is likely to continue for some more time. But there 
are no indications of a memory project that is going to replace the double image of German 
civilians as victims/accomplices, which corresponds to the perpetrator/liberator perception of the 
Allies, with the kind of polarizing discourse that is required to establish a cultural trauma. 
 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
Adorno, Theodor W. 1998. “The Meaning of Working Through the Past.” In Critical Models: 

Interventions and Catchwords, trans. Henry W. Pickford. New York: Columbia 
University Press, pp. 89-103. 

Alexander, Jeffrey C. 2003. The Meanings of Social Life: A Cultural Sociology. New York: 

Oxford University Press. 

Theory 22, no. 4: 527-573. 

Alexander, Jeffrey C. 2004. “Cultural Pragmatics Between Ritual and Strategy.” Sociological 

Bergmann, Martin S., and Milton E. Jucovy, eds. 1990. Generations of the Holocaust. New 

York: Columbia University Press. 

Bernig, Jörg 2005. Phantomschmerzen. Die Gegenwärtigkeit des Bombenkrieges gegen die 

Deutschen.” In Walter Schmitz, ed., Die Zerstörung Dresdens: Antworten der Künste. 
Dresden: Thelem 2005, pp. 3-26. 

Blaschke, Karl-Heinz 1990. “Die Trümmer des Krieges.” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 

February 13. 

 

176

Bodemann, Y. Michal 2002. “The Uncanny Clatter: The Holocaust in Germany before Its Mass 
Commemoration.” In Dan Michman, ed., Remembering the Holocaust in Germany, 1945-
2000. New York: Peter Lang, pp. 43-57. 

Böhme, Jörn 1991. “Der Golfkrieg, Israel und die bundesdeutsche Friedensbewegung.” In Georg 

Stein, ed., Nachgedanken zum Golfkrieg. Heidelberg: Palmyra, pp. 203-25. 

Boog, Horst 2008. “Die strategische Bomberoffensive der Alliierten gegen Deutschland und die 
Reichsluftverteidigung in der Schlussphase des Krieges.” In: Das Deutsche Reich und der 
Zweite Weltkrieg, ed. Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt, vol. 10.1. Munich: Deutsche 
Verlags-Anstalt, pp. 777-884. 

Brunner, José 2007. “Trauma and Justice: The Moral Grammar of Trauma Discourse from 

Wilhelmine Germany to Post-Apartheid South Africa.” In Austin Sarat, Nadav 
Davidovitch, and Michal Alberstein, eds., Trauma and Memory: Reading, Healing, and 
Making Law. Stanford, CA: Stanford California Press, pp. 97-118. 

Clausewitz, Carl von 1976. On War (1832–34), ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret. 

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Diner, Dan 1991. Der Krieg der Erinnerungen und die Ordnung der Welt. Berlin: Rotbuch. 
Etheridge, Brian 2008. “The Desert Fox, Memory Diplomacy, and the German Question in Early 

Cold War America.” Diplomatic History 32, no. 2: 207-38. 

Evans, Richard J. 2009. The Third Reich at War. New York: Penguin. 
Eyerman, Ron 2002. Cultural Trauma: Slavery and the Formation of African-American Identity. 

Eyerman, Ron 2008. The Assassination of Theo van Gogh: From Social Drama to Cultural 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Trauma. Durham: Duke University Press 

Fox, Thomas C. 2006. “East Germany and the Bombing War.” In Wilfried Wilms and William 

Rasch, eds., Bombs Away! Representing the Air War over Europe and Japan. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp. 113-30. 

Freud, Sigmund 2005. “Three essays on the theory of sexuality.” In The Standard Edition of the 
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, trans. James Strachey, vol. 7. London: 
Hogarth Press, pp. 124-248. 

Friedrich, Jörg 2006. The Fire: The Bombing of Germany, 1940-1945, trans. Allison Brown. 

New York: Columbia University Press. 

Gregor, Neil 2000. “A Schicksalsgemeinschaft? Allied Bombing, Civilian Morale, and Social 

Dissolution in Nuremberg, 1942-1945.” The Historical Journal 43, no. 4: 1051-70.  

Heins, Volker 2007. “Crusaders and snobs: moralizing foreign policy in Britain and Germany, 

1999-2005.” In David Chandler and Volker Heins, eds., Rethinking Ethical Foreign 
Policy: Pitfalls, Possibilities and Paradoxes. London: Routledge, pp. 50-69. 

Heukenkamp, Ursula 2001. “Gestörte Erinnerung. Erzählungen vom Luftkrieg.“ Amsterdamer 

Beiträge zur neueren Germanistik 50.2: 469-92. 

Huyssen, Andreas 2003. “Air War Legacies: From Dresden to Baghdad.” New German Critique, 

no. 90: 163-76 

Kil, Wolfgang 1989. “Dokumente und Argumente.” In Hinterlassenschaft und Neubeginn: 

Fotografien von Dresden, Leipzig und Berlin in den Jahren nach 1945, ed. Wolfgang Kil. 
Leipzig: VEB Fotokinoverlag, pp. 9-28. 

Kloke, Martin 2007. “Israel – Alptraum der deutschen Linken?” In Matthias Brosch et al., eds., 
Exklusive Solidarität: Linker Antisemitismus in Deutschland. Berlin: Metropol, pp. 301-
23. 

 

177

Langenbacher, Eric 2008. “Twenty-first Century Memory Regimes in Germany and Poland: An 
Analysis of Elite Discourses and Public Opinion.” German Politics & Society 26, no. 4: 
50-81. 

Langenohl, Andreas 2001. “Erinnerungskonflikte und Chancen ihrer ‘Hegung’.“ Soziale Welt 52, 

no. 1: 71-91. 

Müller, Rolf-Dieter 2004. Der Bombenkrieg 1939-1945. Berlin: Ch. Links. 
Neumann, Franz 1942. Behemoth: The Structure and Practice of National Socialism 1933-1944. 

New York: Oxford University Press. 

Nolte, Hans-Heinrich 2008. “Die andere Seite des Holocaust.” Die Zeit (Hamburg), January 24. 
Nossack, Hans Erich 2004. The End: Hamburg 1943, trans. Joel Agee. Chicago: Chicago 

University Press. 

Richter, Horst-Eberhard 1991. “Gegen das Vergessen und Verdrängen.“ In Georg Stein, ed., 

Nachgedanken zum Golfkrieg. Heidelberg: Palmyra, pp. 15-21. 

Schäfer, Gert 1992. “Wider die schrecklichen Vereinfacher.” In Jürgen Seifert et al., eds., Logik 

der Destruktion: Der zweite Golfkrieg als erster elektronischer Krieg und die 
Möglichkeiten seiner Verarbeitung im Bewußtsein. Frankfurt: Materialis, pp. 8-14. 
Sebald, W.G. 2004. On the Natural History of Destruction, trans. Anthea Bell. New York: 

Modern Library. 

Shandley, Robert 2001. Rubble Films: German Cinema in the Shadow of the Third Reich. 

Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 

Taylor, Frederick 2004. Dresden, Tuesday, February 13, 1945. London: Bloomsbury. 
Thiessen, Malte 2007. Eingebrannt ins Gedächtnis: Hamburgs Gedenken an Luftkrieg und 

Kriegsende 1943 bis 2005. Munich: Dölling und Galitz. 

White, Joseph Robert 2002. “Target Auschwitz: Historical and Hypothetical German Responses 

to Allied Attack.” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 16, no.1: 54-76. 

Widera, Thomas 2005. “Gefangene Erinnerung. Die politische Instrumentalisierung der 
Bombardierung Dresdens.“ In Lothar Fritze and Thomas Widera, eds., Alliierter 
Bombenkrieg: Das Beispiel Dresden. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, pp. 109-34. 

 
 
 
 
 

 

178

 
Wolf Vostell, “Lipstick Bomber” (1968). 
 
 

 

 
“The Bombing Holocaust Cannot Be Refuted!” Dresden 2004 
 
 

 

 

179

 
“Dresden – Hiroshima – Baghdad. Outlaw the Anglo-American Bombing Terror!” 
Dresden 2008 
 

 

 
“All Good Things Come From Above.” Dresden 2005 
 
 

 

 

180

 

 
“Bomber Harris Superstar—Thanks to You from the Red Antifa.” Berlin 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

181

Traumatic Memory in Generational Perspective  

 

Radim Marada 

Faculty of Social Studies 

Masaryk University 

 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The article attempts to contribute to the recent debate on cultural trauma by 1) adding the 
historically recent example of post-communist memorizing of communism to the cases of the 
Holocaust, the American slavery and the German Nazism, around which the debate has 
particularly evolved, and 2) focusing systematically on the generational aspect of the issue. It 
defends the analytical value of the concept of cultural trauma, both theoretically (in the first part 
of the article) and with the help of the empirical example of memory of communism in 
Czechoslovakia and the Czech Republic (in the second part of the article). It shows how 
memories and past experience acquire a traumatic nature within the context of a generationally 
divided discourse of guilt. It especially accentuates two related features of traumatic 
memory/experience: ambivalence and silencing effect. And it illustrates these two aspects of 
trauma on the example of postcommunist memorizing of the communist experience. It also 
attempts to trace sociologically, rather than psychologically, the relevant intervening variables 
that limit the scope of historical imagination, hindering transferability of the past experience onto 
the younger generations – and thus contributing to the traumatic character of the contested 
memories and the heightened sense of generational divide at the same time. 
 
 
Keywords: collective memory, communication of experience, communist past, cultural 
trauma, generations, post-communism  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Draft – not edited 

 
 
 
 
Introduction 

 

182

 
Ever since Manheim’s seminal study on generations, sociologists have generally agreed that, for 
an individual, the core of a generational habitus takes shape in the time of entering adulthood. It 
is the moment in one’s life-course when a period of personal maturation intersects with 
formative historical events or forces – the moment at which a youth makes „fresh contact“158 
with history and the adult world. Such a statement indeed calls for a wide range of qualifications. 
Some of them are dealt with by Mannheim, such as why it is in the state of youth that people 
absorb the kind of experience that will be constitutive of their specific generational identity. 
Others remain outside his attention. Among the latter, there is the question of the nature of the 
formative historical events and forces. Why do just some events or periods in history play the 
generation-constitutive role, while others do not? What exactly does their formative function 
consist of? In these points, Mannheim remains largely silent. He takes for granted an 
independent rhythm of history, which sometimes gets more dynamic, sometimes more static, 
fostering the formation of generational awareness in the former case, while hindering it in the 
latter.  
 
In the following, I will take the analytical advantage of the culturalist stream in current sociology 
in order to shed more light on this issue – in a particular context of a recent theoretical debate 
and with a particular empirical aim. It is the triple task of this chapter, first, to contribute to the 
general sociological theory of generations, second, to highlight the generational perspective in 
the sociological debate on cultural trauma and collective memory, and third, to present 
communism as one of the past historical events or rather periods which have left an intense 
generational chasm in its wake.  
 
The sequence of the aims should perhaps be reversed, since the major contribution is attempted 
at the empirical level of getting the topic of communism – more concretely the post-communist 
articulation of generational cleavages in the process of collective, and traumatic remembering of 
communism – on the sociological table. It is less my ambition to correct anything substantial in 
the theory of cultural trauma as it has recently been developed especially by and around the Yale 
                                                 
158 Karl Mannheim, „The Problem of Generations“ in Essays on the Sociology of Knowledge 
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964), 293. 

 

183

Center for Cultural Sociology.159 Rather, I am making an extensive use of it, further 
strengthening the culturalist stance, and highlighting – both empirically and theoretically – the 
generational aspect involved in the debate, especially in the contributions by Bernhard Giesen 
and Ron Eyerman.160 Neither is it my primary task to exercise a critique of Mannheim’s theory 
of generations. A culturalist departure from his position, in accounting history as a producer of 
generational divisions, will be apparent throughout the text. After all, there is not much more to 
add here to Mannheim’s conception on a general level. Even from the viewpoint of recent 
cultural sociology, though not only from this one, Mannheim’s piece on generations remains 
remarkably inspirational, analytically rich, and theoretically sound. As such, it still calls for 
being amended, corrected, and developed via empirical investigations of the subject matter, 
rather than replaced by another theoretical paradigm. 
 
 
From psychoanalytical to cultural concept of trauma (via the generational perspective) 
 
One important amendment to Mannheim’s theory of generations is provided by Bernhard 
Giesen161, and it pursues the path taken in this text as well. It employs the concept of traumatic 
experience as a historical trigger of generational consciousness. Referring to the concept of 
historical time by Reinhart Koselleck, Giesen explores the way in which traumatic events leave a 
strong imprint in the shared experience of a young age cohort, providing a dramatic experiential 
ground for its definition as a distinct generation. “Thus the collective trauma of a generation 
                                                 
159 Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2004). 
160 Bernhard Giesen, „Noncontemporaneity, Asynchronicity and Divided Memories“ in Time & 
Society 13:1 2004a, 27-40. Bernhard Giesen, “The Trauma of Perpetrators: The Holocaust as the 
Traumatic Reference of German national Identity” in Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity. 
Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004). Ron Eyerman, 
“Intellectuals and the Construction of an African American Identity: Outline of a Generational 
Approach” in Generational Consciousness, Narrative, and Politics. June Edmunds and Bryan S 
Turner, eds., (Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002). Ron Eyerman, “Cultural Trauma: 
Slavery and the Formation of African American Identity” in Cultural Trauma and Collective 
Identity. Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004). Ron 
Eyerman, “The Past in the Present: Culture and the Transmission of Memory“ in Acta 
Sociologica 47:2 2004, 159-169. 
161 Bernhard Giesen, „Noncontemporaneity, Asynchronicity and Divided Memories“ 

 

184

constitutes a distinctive historical horizon (…), a founding event of history that for the life span 
of this generation is shared neither by the preceding nor the succeeding generation.”162 Here 
there is one important aspect of a life of a generation. A generation is recognized by social actors 
– among other properties – as a carrier of a specific historical memory, and that specificity stems 
from the unique intensity of a cohort’s encounter with history at the time of youth. Wars won and 
lost, occupations and liberations, cultural upheavals, economic crises or booms, revolutions and 
contra-revolutions, assassinations or emergences of charismatic leaders, any such historical 
turning point is jointly experienced by all concerned, regardless of age. Yet it is always just a 
circumscribed age cohort that encounters a particular historical experience of this kind in their 
formative years of entering (mentally at least) the adult world. This uniquely intense historical 
experience constitutes a distinctive generational bond, the basis of a mutual understanding that 
cannot be easily shared by those who have not gone through the same traumatic ordeal (or 
triumphant glory) at the time of making a “fresh contact” with both history and adult life at the 
same time. 
 
The shared dramatic life-historical experience, however, does not only constitute an abstract 
sense, however strong, of an inalienable generational bond. It also becomes reflected, 
contextualized and sometimes rationalized by representatives of the generation it has brought to 
social and cultural existence, especially in their making sense of an experience of other 
generations. This is what Mannheim takes into account when he speaks of the “interpretive 
formative principles” of a generation.163 A formative generational experience tends to wield a 
perspective for interpreting history in a wider scope. It provides a ground for understanding past 
historical events and experiences of earlier generations, but it also absorbs later impulses, and it 
makes a distinct sense of both within its own sensibility. Therefore a collective past, shared 
across all age cohorts, tends to present itself from different angles to different generations of one 
and the same collectivity. It is when such differences become articulate and clash with each other 
in conflicting interpretations that age cohorts become generations, that is, they are recognized as 
such by involved social actors and thus made socially real and mattering. 
 
                                                 
162 ibid., 36. 
163 Mannheim, op.cit., 306. 

 

185

To account for such cases, the concept of cultural trauma comes particularly apposite, although it 
should not be hastily applied to all instances of generational conflict over history. It departs from 
the psychoanalytically restricted understanding of traumatic experience, but for good analytical 
reason. Psychoanalysis stresses deep inhibitions in one’s psyche to recall disturbing past 
experiences, that is, something in one’s past which is difficult to digest morally and existentially. 
Trauma or traumatic situation, in this perspective, is located in one’s past, and the mechanisms of 
repressing it from memory are largely unconscious. Yet once the traumatizing experience is 
identified in one’s past, for example by a psychoanalyst, the traumatic effect does not 
automatically disappear by this virtue. To the contrary, the disturbing past experience is just 
made subject to reflection and self-reflection.   
 
The concept of cultural trauma takes the step, and it understands the painful process of reflexive 
memorizing as a constitutive part of the traumatic experience. Should a discomforting past 
experience become traumatic, it still must remain in the memory reservoir of the concerned 
actors. They may strive to forget it, repress it in their self-understanding, disregard it while 
solving practical problems of today, and make it meaningless. At the end of the day, however, 
one can always be reminded of it, accidentally or intentionally, either as an individual, or by a 
challenge to an entire collectivity to which s/he belongs. If such a remainder brings about the 
feelings of discomfort, insecurity, anxiety, a doubt about one’s Self, the experience in its 
traumatic effect has never been completely forgotten or repressed. It still surfaces as a distinct 
moment of reference in one’s biography, as it does in common history.  
 
In other words, an event or an experience is not traumatic in itself. It is the uneasy memory of it 
that makes it traumatic. An event and its experience assume the meaning of trauma in so far as 
recalling them shatters one’s personal or collective self-understanding.  
“Trauma is not the result of a group experiencing pain. It is the result of this acute discomfort 
entering into the core of the collectivity’s sense of its own identity.”164 After all, Sigmund Freud 
himself comes close to the point when he says, e.g.: “It is as if these patients had not finished 
                                                 
164 Jeffrey C. Alexander, “Toward a Theory of Cultural Trauma” in Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity. Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004), 
10. 

 

186

with the traumatic situation, as though they were still faced by it as an immediate task which has 
not been dealt with; (…).”165 But the psychoanalytical position switches the cause and the 
symptom. It still locates trauma in the past, and stretches its impact mysteriously to the present. 
The cultural sociological approach, to the contrary, shows that traumatic are the barriers – 
cultural and social, communicative and psychological – that actors face when trying to make 
sense of their past experience, to get the latter in line with how they want to see themselves 
today. Then repression of a past deeply disturbing experience is not only a psychological 
phenomenon, it also stems from limited communicability of such experience. It is the 
impossibility to square such experience with our present self-understanding and self-esteem that 
makes it truly traumatic. 
 
The cultural sociological approach does not completely disregard and devaluate the 
psychoanalytical inspiration. It just re-formulates one of its central concepts in order to endow it 
with a wider empirical reach and a richer explanatory power, at least from the sociological point 
of view. In fact, the cultural approach employs the concept of trauma for the same analytical 
reason as psychoanalysis did – that is, in order to account for an aspect in our experience that 
otherwise may have gone unnoticed. This is the ultimate reason for replanting the concept of 
trauma from the psychoanalytical soil into the cultural sociological one.  
 
We adopt the concept of cultural trauma precisely because it makes it possible to relate past 
experience and its present memorizing to the empirical process of articulation of generational 
cleavages. It makes it possible to account empirically for the case of ‘divided memories’166 as 
one, though not the sole, aspect of articulation of generational distinctions. And the generational 
analytical perspective, in turn, makes empirical sense of the generational transferability of 
trauma through communicative non-transferability of the traumatizing experience onto those 
who have not lived through that experience. Just as individual trauma comes with a 
biographically shattered self-esteem and self-understanding, collective trauma relates to the 
historically wounded identity of a collectivity. Trauma comes with a transposition of a present 
                                                 
165 Sigmund Freud, “Fixation to Traumas – The Unconscious” in Introductory Lectures on 
Psychoanalysis (New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Co., 1966), 340. 
166 Giesen, „Noncontemporaneity, Asynchronicity and Divided Memories“ 

 

187

conflict onto the chronological dimension. It is a powerful reminder that integrity and identity 
finds its sources in the body’s past. And the nature of generational conflicts makes it clear that 
this applies as well to collective bodies, that is, to collectively shared identity and integrity. 
 
For generations are not only historically emerging and disappearing collectivities. They also are 
relational phenomena. As there would be no generation without a shared historical lot of a 
specific age cohort, there also would be no generation without other generations sharing the 
same collective identity (national, ethnic, religious, regional, etc.). One’s own generational 
feeling is only acknowledged in encounters, physical or ideational, with what is identified as 
representations or representatives of a different generation inhabiting the same historical region. 
It is not just a particular historical experience that makes a generation out of an age cohort. It is 
this experience being absorbed, understood, and represented differently than how representatives 
of other generations understand and represent this same collective experience. Generational 
conflict – and generations alone, for that matter – can only emerge if individuals identify with 
others not only along the same-age line, but also with those who are generationally different, 
with their predecessors, and their ancestors. Generations make experiential sense only within a 
collective body with a shared history, but divided memory of it. It is only then that a difference 
in memorizing the past matters in the present. An articulated generational cleavage or conflict, in 
turn, reminds us of a shared (historical) identity of all involved. The life of generations is an 
experience of the non-contemporaneity of the contemporaneous.167 
 
 
Uneasy memories of communism  
 
The making of history that matters 
 
Although the concept of cultural trauma has mainly been discussed and developed in reference to 
the Holocaust, slavery and Nazism168, the East-Central European communism seems to be an 
equally inviting historical case to be accounted for in this analytical perspective. And this is the 
                                                 
167 Mannheim, op.cit., 283. 
168 Alexander, Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity 

 

188

case despite the latter poses some specific difficulties for such analysis at the same time. The 
reason for both, analytical usefulness of the concept of cultural trauma and analytical difficulties 
of using the concept, is basically the same: communism is, compared to the other cases, a more 
recent historical “event” – but one which has already been subject to conflicting public 
interpretations and discoursive struggles in the post-communist countries. It is the vivid and 
publicly contested memory of the communist past, shattering common national identities and 
peculiarly dividing national communities in the post-communist countries, which signifies 
presence of the trauma process. It is therefore somehow surprising that the question of 
communist trauma has so far largely remained outside of sociologists’ attention.169 
 
The lack of attention to the trauma aspect in collective memorizing of the communist past relates 
to a certain uniqueness of this case as compared to the other historical examples of the trauma 
process. Firstly, the Czechoslovak “Lustration Law”,170 contemplated in public and political 
forums since the very regime change and implemented in 1991, was of a different kind than the 
post-war Nuremberg Trials in Germany, in two respects at least. It was not imposed by a foreign 
power, and (as such) it is a powerful symbol of an internal division within the national 
community between victims and culprits of the communist injustices. While in the cases of 
Nazism and the Holocaust the whole collectivities, Germans or Jews, have naturally been seen as 
                                                 
169 Piotr Sztompka has come relatively close to this topic in his article “The Trauma of Social 
Change: A case of Postcommunist Societies”. (Piotr Sztompka, “The Trauma of Social Change: 
A Case of Postcommunist Societies” in Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity. Jeffrey C. 
Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004)) But, as the subtitle says, his 
primary concern is with postcommunism. In such a case, however, serious problems arise with 
the analytical use and explanatory power of the concept of trauma. Hans Joas rightly points out 
that “as a whole his chapter is characterized by an extremely wide notion of trauma so that 
almost every social change would have to be seen as traumatic.” (Hans Joas, “Cultural Trauma? 
On the Most Recent Turn in Jeffrey Alexander’s Cultural Sociology” in: European Journal of 
Social Theory. 8:3 2005, 372) Moreover, in Sztompka’s use of the concept, the question of 
traumatic memory, the difficult recalling of a traumatic experience – which is central to the 
cultural (and also psychoanalytical) understanding of trauma – disappears altogether. 
170 The “Lustration Law” was implemented in order to legally prevent former high positioned 
functionaries of the Communist Party, contracted collaborators of the communist secret police, 
and members of the communist “People’s Militia” to hold higher offices in the post-communist 
state bureaucracy and other institutions (like, e.g., state sponsored or non-private universities and 
media). In the following part of the article, I will be exclusively focusing on the Czech and 

 

189

perpetrators or victims respectively, this does not apply to the post-communist national 
communities. Secondly, the level, nature and acts of historical guilt have been vibrantly present 
issues within post-communist societies from the very moment of regime changes, and they have 
constituted sharp symbolic divisions with concrete consequences for the involved actors. Not 
only did the question of historical guilt come from inside, it also came immediately after the 
historical break – and formation of generational divisions, as we will see shortly, has ever since 
been an important part of this historical self-reflection.171 And thirdly, while the process of 
cultural constitution a trauma of slavery among American Blacks was a rather gradual process, 
triggered by later developments like the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s, the 
intensified interest in ethnic (African) roots of black Americans, and the establishment of widely 
recognized public representations of American Blacks (black literature, black history accounts, 
intellectuals and writers, political representatives, etc.)172, all of this – political and social 
mobilization, strong sense of national identity, and public representations – has been at work 
since the actual collapse of communist regimes. 
 
It therefore seems that we cannot refer to a certain delay in the trauma effect of the collective 
memory of communism, a delay that has been noted in the other three instances (even though in 
each for different reasons, partly suggested above), and which is another constitutive part of the 
trauma process. Still silence has been a part of this process as the latter developed in the post-
communist environment. It has been the silence of those who have been persistently and 
impassionedly asked for explanation of the nature and motives of their assumed collaboration 
with the communist regime. Their personal testament should provide an answer to how it had 
been possible at all that majority of the adult population so willingly exchanged trivial or just 
                                                                                                                                                             
Czechoslovak case. But much of the argument, on the general level, can easily be applied to 
other post-communist countries and contexts as well.  
171 In the post-war Germany, according to Giesen’s account, the public salience of the question 
of historical guilt as well as the strong sense of a generational difference constituted around this 
question did not appear before “the 1960s, when a new generation entered the political stage. 
This generation was born after the war and did not have personal memories of the Nazi past. 
Children of this generation broke the coalition of silence and faced their parents with 
inconvenient questions that until then had been the mark of outsiders (…).” (Giesen, “The 
Trauma of Perpetrators: The Holocaust as the Traumatic Reference of German national Identity”, 
127) 
172 See Eyerman 2002, 2004a, 2004b 

 

190

fallacious certainties for significant concessions, and thus made the long continuation of the 
unjust regime possible. What has been sought is a remedy for the wounded national identity, a 
clue to a national understanding and self-understanding. The silence of the communist trauma is 
the unwillingness of the assumed culprits to explain what in the eyes of many of them is 
inexplicable, since their language does not fit the newly created framework of historical 
imagination. The criteria of sincerity have changed with the historical turn. The addressed feel 
that the query for an explanation is in fact a demand for their apology, a demand that is 
psychologically uncomfortable, since such “coming out” can never lead to a full understanding 
and reconciliation. The stakes are too high, and the discoursive means at hand severely restricted. 
 
It is an important feature of post-communist environment – and this particularly applies to the 
Czechoslovak and Czech case – that it has provided a largely uncontested agent of critical 
historical self-reflection: the youth. Young people (especially university students, young 
professionals, but to some extent also high school students) took an important part in triggering 
the processes that eventually led to the old regime’s collapse. True, the picture of the youth’s 
revolutionary involvement soon reached an almost mythical dimension in the post-revolutionary 
culture. Yet all the more it has endowed the youth with a strong legitimization to ask the 
uncomfortable questions. It elevated them to the symbolic status of those who: first, could not 
have been straightforwardly responsible for the past injustices; second, have therefore been the 
most sincere in their revolutionary involvement; and third, whose lives has already been and still 
will be affected by the troubled past nevertheless. This symbolic position dissociated them from 
majority of the adult part of the population, and it did so prospectively and retrospectively as 
well. They are presented and self-presented as those with a unique historical merit and 
imagination, as wittingly captured in Adam Michnik’s famous quip: the young people made the 
revolution happen, since they did not know it was impossible.  
 
It is also the historical immediacy of the trauma discourse which has made the emerging 
generational cleavage a more salient aspect of the historical self-reflection in post-communist 
societies. It is the urgent public and political concern with the relatively recent past that 
represents one of the most dramatic discoursive fields through which the generational cleavage 
has been articulated.  

 

191

 
The immediate and continuing political sensitivity and public salience of the question of the 
communist past in post-communist societies brings about two sorts of problems for a 
sociological analysis. Let me briefly address them both. On the one hand, any attempt at a 
sociological account of the current trauma process runs the risk of becoming part of the process 
itself, instead of reclaiming the status of an ideologically disinterested (if not impartial) analysis 
designed to provide a deeper understanding of the stakes involved. It can easily be read through 
the partisan lenses of “which side are you on”. This may not be a problem for a more radical sort 
of ‘public sociology’, yet it is a problem for any truly critical theory. For the latter’s task is not to 
provide an intellectual ammunition to a party in ideological or political conflict, but to cultivate a 
critical understanding and self-understanding of the involved actors. 
 
The other side of the problem is analytical in kind, and it takes us back to the subject matter. As 
students of generations well know, their topic is largely elusive when the task is to analyze 
generations that are still in the making. It is a comfortable theoretical enterprise to account for 
the generation of the 1960s, for example, since this generation has already secured its symbolic 
status in western history, it has established itself through a distinct identity and various cultural 
representations. We have already been able to observe how representatives of this generation and 
its identity have later left a distinctive impact on culture, politics, family patterns, and also work 
ethic. And knowing the outcomes, it also is easier for us to trace back the relevant aspects of the 
formative experience of this generation.  
 
None of this is readily on hand when we look at the post-communist age cohort, the post-
communist youth. And yet we still can see how intensely young people in post-communist 
countries are haunted by the past of their parents, teachers, bosses, older politicians and 
journalists, neighbors and colleagues at work. Certainly this is not their only or primary concern. 
It only comes to mind in certain situations and contexts. But it has already found its place in their 
historical sensitivity, even though it is troubling for some more than others, and it has been 
articulated in specific forums (the media, universities, social movements, judiciary, institutions 
of political representation, etc.), to which not all of them have equal access.  
 

 

192

The personal past of their older mates matters to young people, too, since it seems to affect their 
current lives and their future as well. The strong sense of a historical break, which makes the past 
of parents and grandparents seem so unique and their past world so different from that of today, 
is the basic experiential ground for an equally strong feeling of generational difference. At this 
point, it even does not need an explicit or articulate content. It is irresistibly suspected and taken 
for granted. Substantial articulation of the generational difference, after all, will be almost 
naturally delivered by the urgent examination and re-examination of the mysterious past, i.e., in a 
process instantaneously triggered by the sense of a dramatic historical break.  
 
The question of the elders’ past can only be seen as a generational problem because this past 
becomes a part of common history, that is, a history that bounds the younger and the older 
together. It is not easy to ignore history’s challenge in an environment which persistently brings 
the communist past up as a problem for mundane social and political processes, not only for the 
shared national identity. The interest in the past is unswervingly imposed by the sense of the 
latter’s practical importance. Here history offers itself as a source of understanding of those 
affected by it, as a ground for explaining their present behavior, making sense of their present 
motives, and inferring what may be expected from them. And all this is easier achieved to the 
extent to which the past gets anchored in a frictionless framework of collective memory, while 
the will to a critical ‘historical understanding’ has weakened.173 Historical understanding, with 
its ambiguities and uncertainties, always seems less practical in providing a clear point 
orientation in the present and for the future. And an appeal to such ‘historical understanding’ of 
past experience in its ambiguity will readily be recognized as a cunning trick, as an attempt to 
                                                 
173 Here I use the distinction made by Peter Novick with reference to Maurice Halbwachs: 
“Indeed, collective memory is in crucial senses ahistorical. To understand something historically 
is to be aware of its complexity, to have sufficient detachment to see it from multiple 
perspectives, to accept the ambiguities, including moral ambiguities, of protagonists’ motives 
and behavior. Collective memory simplifies; sees events from a single, committed perspective; is 
impatient with ambiguities of any kind; reduces events to mythic archetypes.” (Peter Novick, 
The Holocaust in American Life (Boston: A Mariner Book, 2000), 3-4) This way of contrasting 
‘collective memory’ with ‘historical understanding’, strongly evokes a positivist preference for 
the latter as the rational, indeed scientific attitude to the past. It will be clear form my further text 
that I see it analytically more useful and empirically proper to read this distinction as one 
between two ideal-typical strategies of dealing with the past in concrete struggles among 
concerned parties over the interpretation of a shared past. 

of 

 

193

obscure the past and blur the clear line between good and evil, as just another way of retouching 
the historical and personal guilt. The promise of an easier orientation in the contemporary world 
incites morally categorical questions, which are as discomforting for the human products of 
communism as were those confronting members of the German war generation some decades 
ago.174 
 
 
Posing the question of guilt 
 
The trauma of the communist past finds it public expressions and hovers in the collective 
memorizing process as a trauma of perpetrators, not as a trauma of victims (as is the case of the 
Holocaust and slavery in Jewish and black American historical memory). In this general sense, 
the post-communist ordeal of collective remembrance resembles the trauma process in the post-
Nazi Germany, described by Giesen175. Being labeled as a perpetrator, as one who took part in 
the atrocities or injustices of the past regime and therefore is held responsible for current 
problems and contamination of national identity, itself is a stigmatizing position. But the core of 
the trauma process resides in the limited communicability of the perpetrators’ past experience. It 
is the actual impossibility to rationalize the past experience which only converts stigma into 
trauma. In their self-defense, the accused have often inclined to present themselves as victims of 
the unfavorable historical circumstances – which is the case of (post-)communists as it was the 
case of the members of the German war generation.176 The kind of ‘historical understanding’ 
which muddles up victims and perpetrators, however, is not easily acceptable, especially from 
the moral point of view, and particularly by those who did not live in the troubled past.177 
                                                 
174 See note no. 6. 
175 Giesen, “The Trauma of Perpetrators: The Holocaust as the Traumatic Reference of German 
national Identity”. 
176 ibid. 
177 The status of outsiders vis-à-vis the communist society has not only pertained to the post-
communist youth, but also, e.g., to Czech or Czechoslovak emigrants, to clear dissidents or those 
who had been in a sense exempt from facing the moral-political dilemmas of life in communism 
(like some segments of the working class, which still had nothing to lose but their chains, even 
during the communist times). Again, not all of the representatives of these categories have been 
equally eager in posing the question of historical guilt – but they have certainly been better 
psychologically predisposed to do so. 

 

194

 
Moreover, even if the analogy between communism and Nazism would seem inadequate in terms 
of historical understanding, it has nevertheless become a part of the struggle over interpretation 
of responsibility for communist injustices. ‘Look, we were no Nazis’, goes one of the self-
defensive patterns of easing the past compromises with the communist regime. Yet also this 
statement is readily recognized as an instrumental strategy of avoiding personal responsibility, 
rather than being taken as a satisfactory historical explanation, and much less as an apology. It is 
little convincing because it looks utterly inappropriate. It only confirms the traumatizing nature 
of a remembering which is marked by helplessness in rationalizing one’s past behavior, and 
eventually by unwillingness to even try to do so. The point is that the concrete extent and 
character of the past atrocities plays just a little role in the cultural production of trauma. Trauma 
is constituted retrospectively, and what matters is the dramatization of challenges which history 
brings to the present. 
 
The question of guilt has been central to the reflection of the communist past, in three respects. 
Firstly, there has been the question of who was guilty for the widespread injustice of the 
communist regime, from imprisoning people for publicly stating their political views opposing 
the policies of the Communist Party and the regime in general, to withholding passports or 
making it impossible to pursue a career for which one was qualified or to study at a university or 
even a high school (for reasons like having a family member emigrated to the West). Who was 
responsible for creating the atmosphere of fear, docility, and opportunism for a large part of the 
population? Secondly, there has been the more immediate concern with people’s past, when new 
elites and leaders were looked for after the regime change, not only in politics, but also in the 
media, at schools and universities, in the state bureaucracy and other institutions. How is 
someone reliable to be found when those who were qualified for these positions had often been 
part of the old communist “nomenclature” or too close to it? How are true proponents of the old 
regime to be recognized in contrast to those who just played the game and did not harm anyone 
directly, at least? And thirdly, the question of guilt arises as many problems of the democratic 
transition are attributed to the communist heritage. Who is to be held accountable for the current 
problems in political life, the economy, and social relations – problems which could have been 
avoided if only we had not started with the burdens the corrupt communist regime? 

 

195

 
 
Disclosing a generational gap: the revolutionary generation vs. the normalization generation 
 
Young people have not been exempt from facing these dilemmas. They have been involved in all 
of the three versions of the post-communist discourse of guilt, although perhaps most 
immediately in the second one. This especially concerns the age cohort that, at a young age, took 
part in the regime changes at the turn of the 1980s and 1990s. As noted above, in Czechoslovakia 
students and young people in general played a crucial role in what has become known as the 
Velvet Revolution of 1989. Violent suppression of a student demonstration in Prague, on 17 
November that year, unleashed a series of events and activities, which eventually led to the 
regime change. Students and young people were particularly active in the first weeks and months 
of the changes – at universities or in the work place.  
 
It was these events and the implicated conflicts what started to draw the dividing line between 
what has later been labeled as the revolutionary and normalization generations. The former took 
its label from spectacular involvement of many of its representatives in the process of the regime 
change. The latter received its brand name from the Communist Party vocabulary of the 1970s. 
Then the official term ‘normalization’ served as a legitimization of the massive crackdown of 
Czechoslovak authorities (especially the Communist Party, judiciary, and police) on any sign of 
ideological dissent, in a widespread and perpetual campaign that followed the military and 
political termination of the democratizing reform process known as Prague Spring of 1968. By 
and large, the term ‘normalization’ had soon become a symbol of the repressive policy of the 
Communist Party under the renewed Soviet control. Long before the regime change in 1989, it 
had been widely (but always privately or just implicitly) understood as an ideological nickname 
for creating the atmosphere of fear, distrust, intrigues, opportunism, docility, and 
submissiveness. Apparently, with such a history of the term and its meaning, the label itself 
imposes a great deal of stigmatization on those who happen to get generationally identified with 
and by it. 
 

 

196

However, it should be noted that this culturally defined and discursively reproduced generational 
division has effectively run through the young cohort itself. That is, it has also divided those who 
were in their twenties and sometimes even late teens at the time of the regime change. The 
cultural definition of the generational divide exerted its social power from the very start. What 
was at stake among the young people themselves, too, was the level and nature of their 
involvement or non-involvement in concrete processes of the regime change at universities or in 
work places, their short institutional past (especially in the Socialist Union of Youth, but 
sometimes also already in the Communist Party), their reputations among peers. All this sorted 
people within this age cohort itself, making ‘revolutionaries’ of some and ‘normalizers’ of 
others, regardless of age. True, in concrete individual cases, this seldom happened definitively, 
once and for all, in every respect. Such clear-cut divisions are rare in history, and they are even 
rarer at times of an inflamed generational partition. Formative generational classification 
struggles initially often occur under the disguise of other sorts of social and political struggles, 
and almost always in persistent negotiations and endeavor to join the side one wants to represent 
and seeks to belong to. In these struggles, generational divisions find their dramatic articulation, 
so that they can serve as a cultural label of belonging to the people of today (or the future) or to 
the people of yesterday. It gradually becomes a commonly understood scheme of interpretation 
and as such it is at hand to be employed in concrete social interactions. The actual generational 
categorization of actors and their generational self-identification comes to word situationally, 
that is, in proper moments and in relevant contexts. However episodically such (self-
)categorization may occur, it often works with a powerful social effectiveness, in so far it is tied 
with positive or negative social sanctions, expectations and self-esteem. 
 
Of course, the cultural definition of the generational gap has not been completely arbitrary in 
historical terms. The ultimate generational division between ‘revolutionaries’ and ‘normalizers’ 
has also reflected the shift in formative historical experience of both age cohorts. The 
representatives of the young revolutionary generation were about to enter the world of adults in 
the second half of the 1980s. This was a world whose effective working principles they saw in 
moral corruption, hypocrisy, and cynical submission to the communist regime. By itself, 
however, this would not have been a different experience than that of the normalization 
generation of the 1970s. Then, in the aftermath of the Warsaw Pact occupation of the country in 

 

197

1968, the installment of the pro-Soviet puppet regime and the political purges that followed 
(especially in the work place and also in the Communist Party itself), another historical round of 
the morally corrupting struggle for positions took place. This was the experience which largely 
shaped the world of the normalization generation, including the nature of its basic inner practical 
and moral conflicts running along the axis “cowardly collaboration vs. heroic resistance”. These 
were the extreme points which in many social contexts and relations (at work and in schools, in 
wider families, among friends, in church and other associations, etc.) provided working criteria 
for a moral categorization and self-understanding of social actors.  
 
The problem for the young in the late 1980s was that now, while cynicism, hypocrisy and 
submissiveness were still expected as a norm of adult behavior, they no longer at least 
safeguarded a chance for a relatively good career. It seemed that good positions had already been 
taken and the circulation of cadres principally reserved for an already re-consolidated, narrow 
and enclosed nomenclature elite. Even young members of this elite started to perceive that they 
can hardly convert their privileged family background into the capital they sought, that is, 
especially the economic one.178 The experience of growing up in the late 1980s was thus a 
variation of the proletarian socialization: amoral submissive assiduousness no longer promised 
noteworthy gains, and civic indifference did no longer resulted in serious losses. Compared to 
the young people of the late 1960s and early 1970s, the young of the late 1980s had less to gain 
by being obedient, and less to lose by being disobedient.  
 
Also this brought many active young people into the revolutionary project and post-revolutionary 
politics at all levels.179 And one of the tasks they embraced was how to get rid of the corrupt 
proponents of the old regime. Of course, not all of them were active in this direction, not all of 
them to the same degree and in the same style, and young people were not the only ones 
involved. Older people took part in the various ‘councils’ and campaigns as well. Yet while the 
                                                 
178 Ivo Možný, Ivo, Proč tak snadno. Některé rodinné důvody sametové revoluce (Why So 
Smoothly. Some family reasons for the velvet revolution) (Praha: SLON, 1991). 
179 We could call these young people active in the so called “civic forums” at universities and 
places of work, but also in the media and newly emerging political parties and movements, a 
generational unit (Mannheim 1964), since they were representative of the whole generation, or 
at least acted like they were.  

 

198

latter tended to stress professional competence, and disregard small concessions to the old 
regime on the part of those who were being profiled, the question of moral purity acquired a 
more prominent place among the young.180 Sure there may have been a pragmatic element at 
work in stressing moral competence by the young people. As they were at times reminded, they 
had not had that much time and opportunities in their lives to get involved in the corrupting 
practices of the old regime, to joint the Communist Party, to sign a petition against the dissidents, 
to accept a position in the political apparatus. Neither had they had the time and opportunities to 
gain sufficient professional reputation and skills required after the regime change.181 And if 
some of them had managed to advance in taking some part in the old regime practices, this 
qualified them to being more easily attached to the generation of the normalizers and normalized.   
 
However, it would be misleading to see the moralizing posture among young revolutionaries 
solely in the perspective of a purely pragmatic calculus of personal gains and losses. What is at 
work here, rather, is the ‘practical sense’ as Pierre Bourdieu182 coins the term. The moral attitude 
mirrors some basic dispositions, schemes of orientation in the social world, which reflect the 
specific experience of historical socialization described above. It is this experience which 
endows the attitude with subjective cogency for the concerned social actors, and which gives 
Bourdieu’s concept its explanatory power. The accent on moral competence of new leaders at all 
levels of different sorts of institutions (not just the political ones) can be understood, in the case 
of the young revolutionaries, as an expression of a mental disposition which no longer took the 
corrupt world of normalization for granted. For them, immunity against the lures of opportunism 
                                                
180 Milan Otáhal and Miroslav Vaněk, Sto studentských revolucí (A Hundred of Student 
Revolutions) (Praha: Lidové noviny, 1999). 
181 In fact, it has become a prominent maker of this generation to complain about the lack of 
competences: weak at foreign languages, no experience abroad, no proper orientation in the 
world of politics and business, no knowledge of newest developments in the fields of their 
interest, etc.  They felt to be deprived of all of this by the regime they dismantled. Ironically, the 
change they had sought made losers of them again – a truly tragic situation. They soon began to 
distinguish themselves generationally from those even younger people who, in their eyes, were 
able to consummate all the new opportunities opened up by the regime change. No wonder the 
young revolutionaries have leaned so much to the value of moral credit. For many, it seems to be 
the only asset remaining to them. (See Radim Marada, „Social Construction of Youth and 
Formation of Generational Awareness after Socialism“ in Petr Mareš et al. Society, 
Reproduction and Contemporary Challenges (Brno: Barrister & Principal, 2004) 
182 Pierre Bourdieu, Practical Reason (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988). 

 

 

199

was still less a matter of personal heroism and still more a matter of common sense – while the 
readiness to give in was not only morally dubious but also less and less intelligible. In the late 
1980s, it was still more difficult to get a reasonable explanation from their peers who were too 
active in expressing their loyalty to the communist regime, especially by joining the Communist 
Party.  
 
 
Imposition of silence 
 
The young people of the late 1980s could perhaps still understand their parents, who entered the 
Party during the 1970s or earlier. But they were sorry for them, rather, since the parents had 
made this concession in order to keep life chances of their children open, without the offspring 
seeing any noteworthy point in such a sacrifice.183 In both instances – in contact with their peers 
and their parents – this resulted in a communicative barrier: irritating, depressing, and 
embarrassing at occasional attempts to break it. As demonstrated also by Alan’s study, 
membership in the Communist Party has been carefully avoided as a conversational topic in 
many families, before as well as after 1989. In the 1970s and the early 1980s, this was still an 
understanding silence. The reasons for political and moral concessions were clear without 
saying, and the shared silence protected those who made them against the feeling and label of 
cowardice or weakness, if not unscrupulousness. No family wants to have such a person in home. 
By the end of the 1980s, the silence started to be driven by futility, rather than understanding. 
 
When the question of guilt and past misdeeds was publicly raised later on, in the time of post-
revolutionary institutional and moral purification, those who had in some way compromised with 
the communist regime did not have any convincing language at hand to explain their moral-
political concessions and retain a sense of self-esteem at the same time. And this especially has 
been a problem for the representatives of the normalization generation. What has remained to 
them, in the context of a public discourse of historical guilt, were arguments pointing to their 
                                                 
183 Josef Alan, Josef, “Rodinné vztahy a členství v KSČ” (“Relations in Families and 
Membership in the Communist Party”) in Otevřená minulost: autobiografická sociologie státního 

 

200

professional ambitions and care for their families – both in danger had they not been loyal to the 
communist regime. But these arguments came little satisfactory to the audience, partly in relation 
to the historical significance of the past misdemeanors (legitimization and in effect support of the 
unjust regime), partly for the futility of such collaboration which after all often did not bring the 
fruits that were to justify it (“look at those who resisted the lures of opportunism, and still 
achieved something and provided for their families”). The outcome has been the picture of 
amoral cowardice combined with historical incompetence. And this is difficult to face by way of 
a rational communication. 
 
There is still another intervening variable that makes it difficult for members of the 
‘normalization generation’ to attempt a public reconstruction of their communist experience. 
Since about the later 1990s, there has been a growing tendency among younger film directors, 
writers, journalists, and sometimes historians and social scientists to account for and come to 
terms with the communist past of their nation.184 From these endeavors, there have emerged two 
representative types of the ‘normalization character’: cynical opportunists on the one hand, and 
devoted communists on the other. The former participate in the regime game only to the point of 
securing their job and family, and perhaps gaining some private profit (like the permission to 
travel abroad), the latter actively foster the regime, although still less by conviction, and still 
more because they know that their privileges depend on it. Without overestimating the impact of 
the culture and media industry, these pictures have certainly contributed to limiting the space of 
imagination in dealing with the communist past, especially for those who do not have direct 
(adult) experience with it. The extent to which these are the only imaginable prototypes of the 
life in communism, biographical stories of the older generation are but variations of the two 
prototypical characters. There is no place in this interpretative framework for those who did not 
belong to nomenclature, nor to the dissent, who made some concessions to the communist 
regime to avoid troubles, but who did feel this as a moral problem, and whose identity was 
                                                                                                                                                             
socialismu (An Open Past: Autobiographical Sociology of State Socialism), Zdeněk Konopásek, 
ed., (Praha: Karolinum, 1999). 
184 It is quite symptomatic, in this respect, that also the director of the German Oscar awarded 
movie The Lives of Others, dealing with the communist past in East Germany before 1989, has 
come as if from another world than he is depicting, in double sense: Florian Henckel von 

 

201

shattered for that reason. There is no place in such a framework for the ambiguous experiences 
and the complexity of pressures of life during communism, in which keeping moral credit in one 
respect sometimes required giving it up in another. The other option during the communist times, 
in the eyes of many, was to resist and become a pointless hero – perhaps admired by some for a 
time, but abandoned by others for good, keeping some moral credit within their families, but 
confronted with a label of practical irresponsibility therein. 
 
The categorical nature of the question of guilt, along with the variety of contexts in which it has 
been posed, has brought about peculiar discursive dynamics. At the abstract level, the dividing 
line between guilt, that is, responsibility for the past injustices, and exemption from such 
responsibility has been clear. However abstract – that is, de-contextualized – this question is, it 
has been posed dramatically and urgently in various public forums. But the criteria of guilt 
(responsibility) have, at the same time, varied according to the context and the stake, and most 
often they have been lumped together and used arbitrarily or instrumentally. What did it mean to 
be a proponent of the old regime?  Was an active and intentional participation in Communist 
Party campaigns against real or potential threats to the regime necessary to qualify one for 
historical guilt? Or did just utterly formal membership in the Union of the Czechoslovak-Soviet 
Friendship, which many chose for their CV’s as a less compromising alternative to joining the 
Communist Party, amount to a support to the regime? What constituted effective collaboration 
with the oppressive communist regime? Did it concern just those in higher positions within the 
Communist Party nomenclature and those found in communist secret police files as its 
collaborators? Or did every member of the Communist Party (about a 1,5 million people from 
the population of 15 million in Czechoslovakia) contribute to past injustices, and thus cannot be 
exempt from their guilt and responsibility? Must every journalist, every teacher, every state 
bureaucrat, every artist appearing on TV, every store manager, etc. – regardless of their 
membership in the Communist Party – have been somehow allied with the regime? Did not all 
99% of the adult population who took part in the staged elections (with results known in 
advance) effectively support the regime?  
 
                                                                                                                                                             
Donnersmarck was born in the western part of Germany (in Cologne) in 1973. He was only 16 
years old when the Berlin Wall came down, and he was 33 when making the movie. 

 

202

Confronted with the lack of clarity in its own criteria, the imperative question of guilt has 
resulted in the kind of ambivalence that is constitutive of cultural trauma.185 It is largely due to 
such ambivalence that the question of historical guilt has become so urgent for some (especially 
the younger), and so discomforting for others (especially the older). “Like psychological 
ambivalence, its manifestation at the sociocultural level sets the stage for the frequently observed 
tendency for generation after generation to engage in compulsive examining and reexamining, 
bringing up new aspects of the trauma, reinterpreting, reevaluating, and battling over symbolic 
significance.”186 Smelser’s account is generally right. But it should be added that the compulsion 
to examine and reexamine the past is not only incited by the very absence of the clear criteria of 
good and evil, by the ambivalence of the past experience when confronted with present 
challenges and attempted self-understandings. The urgency alone stimulates the sense of 
ambivalence which is difficult to overcome communicatively. 
 
On the part of the normalization generation in particular, such ambivalence has brought about a 
silencing effect. For this was the generation which, unlike still older generations, did not have 
any sound excuse for taking part in the corrupt communist project. Members of the older 
generations can at least refer to the attractiveness of the communist idea after experience of the 
1930s’ economic depression and the Second World War. And those who took an active part in 
the reform process of the Prague Spring of 1968 (especially if they were later expelled from the 
Communist Party) can refer to the democratic potential of their vision of ‘socialism with human 
face’.  They can be, and often are (even by themselves), seen and labeled as foolish, historically 
disoriented, but not as morally corrupt. The possibility to refer to these historical circumstances 
of their guilt – if they have accepted it at all – makes them generationally different from those 
who already lack any such historical explanation of their collaboration life strategies. 
 
The memorized history is by no means on the side of the normalization generation, it works 
mercilessly against this generation. However its representatives may try, their explanations are 
perceived as either incomplete or deceiving. Whatever they say in their defense – how they made 
                                                 
185 Neil Smelser, “Psychological Trauma and Cultural Trauma” in Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity. Jeffrey C. Alexander, ed., (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004). 
186  ibid., 54 

 

203

fun of the communists in private or avoided participating in May Day parades by making 
themselves ill – this may at most be a folkloric part of their conversations with coevals. But it 
finds little resonance among the young, if meant as an evidence for personal courage and 
dignity. The young lack the right imagination to value such ‘heroism without risk’, they have 
already adopted different criteria of sincerity.  
 
The above discussion should not suggest that young people have been the only ones to raise the 
question of the communist past and the historical guilt. These problems have by no means been 
an issue for the youth only – ever since the regime change, they have been generally present in 
the public discourse. Instead, my account should have brought to the fore some of the specific 
reasons that have made young people vitally interested in the communist past at all. The point is 
not only that their formative generational experience or their youth predisposes them mentally to 
pose these questions. Their age alone is a symbol which makes this psychologically easier for 
them, since they can hardly be fought back by the same discoursive ammunition. And it is the 
communicative barrier – aggravating full mutual understanding with the older about the moral 
dimension of their common past – that in turn makes them feel generationally alienated and 
eventually curious. 
 
Confronted with the question of historical guilt, eventually even the culprits come to see 
inadequacy of such arguments. It therefore comes as no surprise that publicized biographical 
interviews concerning life in the communist past have so far almost exclusively been reserved 
for either clear dissidents (expelled from work and sometimes imprisoned by the communist 
regime) or the undoubted representatives of the communist regime, the top functionaries 
amounting to about the same small number as the dissidents.187 This is no longer due to a lack of 
interest on the side of the interviewers (sociologists, journalists, etc.), political celebrities of the 
communist regime on both sides have already given their accounts, repeatedly. Josef Alan, the 
Czech sociologist, tried to break this silence by the end of the 1990s, and he still encountered a 
persistent reluctance to speak: “Many of those confronted with the question of what the 
Communist Party meant in their lives refused, politely yet categorically, to respond. Others 
                                                 
187  Miroslav Vaněk and Pavel Urbášek, eds., 2005. Poražení?-Vítězové? Životopisná interview. 
(Losers?-Winners? Biographical Interviews.) (Praha: Prostor, 2005). 

 

204

reacted as if they were subject to torture – and this was not only the case of the former 
Communist party Members. In this sense, an auto/biographical research all too much reminds of 
vivisection.”188 Alan’s study astutely captures the phrase of non-contemporaneity of the 
contemporaneous: “Those who lived through a different time than in which they talk about their 
past lives, in fact anticipate this ‘incomprehensibility’. They suspect how difficult it is to explain, 
clarify and rationalize anything – especially before their own children. In effect, it means to 
accept that by part of their lives they do not belong to the present, that they even can represent 
relicts of the regime despised by all, including by themselves.”189 
 
Here we come to the generational core of the cultural concept of trauma. A direct historical 
experience acquires traumatic nature when it becomes difficult to communicate this experience 
across generations because of its enormous complexity, at least in the eyes of those concerned. 
The bearers of such experience easily convince themselves that those who did not live in their 
past, can never fully understand it – a paradigmatic generational statement. They do not want to 
explain, since their contemporaries do not need any explanation, and the younger generation 
would not take it anyway. If there is any reason to apologize at all for their past misdeeds, there 
is nobody around to apologize to. The guilt is too general, and the young would have been the 
same had they lived in the same time – just another excuse.  
 
The post-communist memorizing of the communist experience once again reveals the 
paradoxical nature of collective trauma: trauma is transferred from one generation to another 
because of the difficult communicative transferability of the experience to which it refers. What 
is traumatizing is not the past experience itself but the situation, in which this experience gets 
dramatized in acts of collective memorizing. Yet it is the dramatized and compulsive process of 
collective memory that, at the same time, poses insurmountable barriers to this experience being 
communicatively shared among generations. 
 
 
 

 

                                                 
188 Alan, op. cit., 168 
189 ibid., 169 

 

205

 

“1974” as Cultural Trauma 

Victor Roudometof & Miranda Christou   

(University of Cyprus) 

 

  

 

THIS VERSION MAY 11th 2009 
 
No  one  could  have  ever  conceived  that  the  treacherous  coup  and  the  Turkish  invasion  that 
followed  it  in  1974  would  overturn  the  smooth  course  of  time;  these  age-old 
habits and folkloric traditions. Along a line of other tragic consequences in our 
lives  and  the  development  of  our  land  and  its  people,  the  blow  to  our  mores, 
customs and the traditions of our land was devastating. 

Demetris Christofias 
President of the Republic of Cyprus, February 9, 2009 190 

This paper outlines the major manifestations of 1974 as a cultural trauma for Greek 

Cypriots and elaborates on the implications of this trauma in the context of the “Cyprus issue.” 
191 Greek Cypriots remember “1974” as the Turkish invasion that displaced around 180,000 
people, caused the death of hundreds and resulted in 1,619 missing persons192 and the island’s 
semi-occupation. As a message repeated in almost every official talk, the president’s words are 
not exceptional even as they assert the exceptionality of a profoundly traumatic event: “1974” is 
a cultural trauma for Greek Cypriots not only because it left “indelible marks upon their group 
consciousness” but also because it is experienced, until today, as an event that changed “their 
future identity in fundamental and irrevocable ways” (Alexander, 2004a: 1). In this paper, we 
explain how “1974” became a cultural trauma for all Greek Cypriots through its 
commemoration, institutionalization and routinization.  

In particular, we use cultural trauma theory to analyze the processes through which Greek 

Cypriots have interpreted the 1974 events as a painful trauma that shapes their current identity. 
In the first section, we establish scope restrictions, unpack some theoretical issues and sketch the 
social processes that fuelled the construction of 1974 as a cultural trauma. Next, we expand our 
analysis into trauma routinization. In this section, our objective is to show how everyday rituals 
are evocative of the trauma and how they echo and reproduce the trauma in Greek Cypriot 
culture. Finally, we examine the problematic nature of the trauma’s transmission and 
                                                 
190 Talk given by the president of Cyprus in commemoration of the occupied community of Kondea, at the church of 

Ayios Charalambos in the Geri refugee housing project. Translation by authors. Full text in Greek at 
http://www.cyprus.gov.cy/moi/pio/pio.nsf/All/8D2BEC4C716A7A46C2257558005C485C? Opendocument 
(Retrieved March 4, 2009). 

191 The “Cyprus Issue” is a term used to describe the unresolved situation of conflict on the island since 1974. The 
United Nations have used the term in various resolutions adopted by the General Assembly. It could be argued 
that from the perspective of the unilaterally declared Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC, since 1983) 
there is no “Cyprus Issue” but a problem of TRNC’s international recognition.    

192 This number was the official estimated figure for the Greek Cypriots who went missing in July and August of 

1974. This estimate has been continuously revised, especially since the beginning of excavations by the 
Investigative Committee for Missing Persons (established in 1981) in August 2006. For more on the politics of the 
recovery of missing persons in Cyprus and the controversy on determining their actual number see Cassia (2005; 
2006). 

 

206

reproduction in the post-1974 generations, who depend upon collective memory alone for 
reconstructing the trauma. We argue that the “1974” cultural trauma commemorated in the 
suffering caused by the island’s forced division has left indelible marks on the Greek Cypriot 
identity but at the same time, it has become the only lens through which Greek Cypriots refract 
their current concerns and future aspirations. 
 
Constructing “1974” as Cultural Drama 

As a carrier group, the collectivity of Greek Cypriots identifies “1974” as the affliction 
that permanently stigmatized their identity. Beyond the violence and deaths, the trauma of 1974 
is interpreted as the drama of being a Greek Cypriot in the various permutations of an unstable 
national identity—Greek Cypriot, Cypriot, Turkish Cypriot—and the categorical uncertainty 
they ensue. On the one hand, 1974 emphasized the Greekness of the Greek Cypriot label through 
the perennial and largely mythologized Greek/Turkish opposition. On the other hand, it 
implicitly forced Greek Cypriots to focus on the Cypriotness of their identity by permanently 
giving up on the idea of union with Greece (enosis) and emphasizing instead the integrity and 
unity of the Republic of Cyprus which includes both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots. The 
nature of the pain is routinely expressed as the pain of loss of ancestral homes (villages and 
family properties) and the uprooting caused by the forceful population movement of some 
180,000 Greek Cypriots. Greek Cypriots relate the victims of the trauma to a wider audience by 
appealing to the violation of rights such as the right to property and the right of return. Given that 
refugees and relatives of missing or ‘disappeared’ persons are international categories, the 
cultural trauma of 1974 is constructed to be relatable at the human, not simply the ethnic level. 
The attribution of responsibility begins with locating Turkey as the state responsible for a 
military intervention that went beyond its constitutional right to protect Turkish Cypriots and 
instead occupied the northern part of the Republic of Cyprus. 

This paper does not detail the historical and political developments that led to the 
construction of “1974” as a cultural trauma for Greek Cypriots, nor is our discussion is going 
to address the successful employment of the trauma narrative in various international 
institutional arenas—such as the UN, world press, the EU—in order to have this narrative 
gain wide international acceptance and nearly global legitimacy. Our aim is to examine its 
construction within the Greek Cypriot community itself, focusing in particular on everyday 
practices as well as institutional rituals and ceremonies that sustain its emotional impact for 
the past 35 years. Therefore, perhaps the first issue that needs to be tackled with regarding 
the applicability of cultural trauma theory in a case of inter-communal ethnic conflict such as 
Cyprus is to address the moral relativism implicit in the multitude of accounts that stress the 
extent to which each side’s national narrative is implicated in the reproduction of memories 
(for example, Papadakis, 2003, 1998, 1993; Anastasiou, 2002; Cockburn, 2004; Cassia, 
2006). That is, Greek Cypriots’ suffering in the context of the 1974 invasion is traditionally 
contrasted to the inter-communal fights of 1963-64 and the suffering of Turkish Cypriots 
who were isolated into ethnic enclaves until the 1974 invasion when they resettled in the 
territory that was self-declared as the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) in 1983. 
In fact, to the extent that cultural trauma is a key element in a group’s master narrative its 
articulation is intertwined with the master narrative itself (Alexander, 2004). Narrativization 
itself then carries important repercussions for constructing a view of history, of group 
conflict and of the Other that can lead to the politics of mutual suspicion and to an increase in 
the possibility of future conflict (Rydgren, 2007). In essence such interpretations adopt an 

 

207

instrumentalist view of culture, whereby symbolic struggles are merely an extension of real 
world power conflicts (Bourdieu, 1989; 1990). 

From our viewpoint, however culture is constitutive and not simply instrumental to social 
life – and as such, there is simply no strict counterpart of “1974” in the experience of the Turkish 
Cypriot community. That should not be misleadingly interpreted as a negation of their suffering. 
It is a mere extension of the gradual nature of inter-communal separation for the Turkish 
Cypriots (versus its abrupt and sudden nature for the Greek Cypriots). It is also an extension of 
the fact that the establishment and commemorative rituals of the post-1983 TRNC cannot be 
viewed in strict correspondence to the post-1974 Republic of Cyprus. This is because of the 
different demographic developments in the post-1974 Greek and Turkish parts of the island: 
While in the Greek-Cypriot controlled Republic of Cyprus nativism has played a major role in 
determining citizenship, in the Turkish-Cypriot controlled TRNC more than 160,000 Turks from 
mainland Turkey were resettled, altering the demographic composition of its citizens193. To 
understand the specificity of cultural trauma, it is necessary to point out that, just like numerous 
other post-colonial societies, Cyprus is characterized by strong nativism (Anderson, 1991). 
Colonially constructed categories of “native Cypriots” operated as a means of re-inscribing the 
peasants’ connections with their kinship groups – which to this date remain the main reference 
group among the island’s natives – as well as with their original village (Loizos, 1975, 1981; 
Loizos and Papataxiarchis, 1991; Attalides, 1976). 

Finally, the major reason for applying cultural trauma theory in the case of “1974” is that 
Greek Cypriots did not have to interpret this event as cultural trauma – but as the inevitable 
consequence of the application of Greek and Turkish nationalist claims over the island. Dual 
partition was a possible outcome of the Cyprus issue even before the establishment of the 
Republic of Cyprus in 1960, and therefore in theory it would have been possible to interpret 
“1974” as the natural conclusion of this process. Therefore, our approach seeks to 
problematize “1974” and to view its construction as a process – and not as the result of a 
single event. Needless to say, the constructed nature of cultural trauma does not imply its 
fictionality—in the sense of the fantastic or imagined—neither does it foreclose the notion of 
an event that predictably results in pain and suffering. It emphasizes, however, the 
importance of attending to the socially mediated processes that translate suffering into a 
collective cultural trauma, the proportions of which extend beyond individual experience.  
This means that suffering which is not personally experienced can be deeply traumatizing for 
the next generation or that violence and death can be interpreted as heroic and triumphant 
instead of traumatic. In the case of Cyprus, 1974 is not a cultural trauma for Turkish Cypriots 
who were also displaced from their towns and villages in the southern part of the island and 
relocated in the northern part of the island. Instead, the sense of displacement and relocation 
has given birth to a cultural trauma felt not only by those Greek Cypriots who personally 
experienced the events, but, as we shall show, even for Greek Cypriots born into families of 
internally displaced persons194 (referred to in Greek as “refugee” families [prosfyges]). From 

                                                 
193 According to the Republic of Cyprus Press and Information Office (PIO) the Turkish Cypriot population is 

estimated at 88,100 and settlers from Turkey at 162,000 (more information at 
http://www.moi.gov.cy/moi/pio/pio.nsf/a_problem_en/a_problem_en?OpenDocument). The official position of 
the TRNC does not differentiate between native Turkish Cypriots and settlers from Turkey (more information at 
http://www.trncinfo.com/eng/index.htm). 

194 According to the 1951 Geneva Convention and the 1967 Protocol those not forced to leave their country are 

described as ‘internally displaced’ people and not refugees. Given that the UNHCR describes their condition as a 

 

208

a Greek Cypriot perspective, Turkish Cypriots could have identified with the trauma of 1974 
because they were also displaced and suffered losses. Turkish Cypriot narratives, however, 
follow a different timeline that emphasizes the suffering caused in the 1963-64 inter-
communal conflict that confined them in enclaves under constant fear of persecution 
(Papadakis, 2003; Bryant, 2008).  
 To understand this development, “1974” must be analyzed as a “horrendous event” 
(Alexander, 2004a) that stands as a rupture in time or, in the president’s opening quote, as an 
event that overturned the “smooth course of time”. Cultural traumas treat the painful 
historical event as a happening ‘out-of-time’ (Alexander, 2004b: 226). That suggests the 
trauma’s unpredictable character as well as the inability to view the event as part of the 
ordinary course of time. For Greek Cypriots, the break from ordinary time and the 
rootlessness of their experience are two of the main factors that contributed to looking upon 
the events of 1974 as a cultural trauma. Both of these are directly attributed to forced 
relocation and a perceived break with tradition. We begin, therefore, by detailing the two 
major characteristics of the “1974” cultural trauma: the experience of uprootedness and the 
vision of a mythical day of return. 

The metaphor of uprootedness is pervasive in the refugees’ narratives of loss, denoting 
both the literal supplantation of a largely rural and agrarian population, as well as the centrality 
of the land in configuring identity (Loizos, 1981). As Bryant (2002) has argued, kinship with the 
land partakes of religious imagery in Cyprus and it represents another element of the 
metaphorical familial connections of nationalism that naturalize the relationship between the 
people and the nation. However, 1974 did not simply deprive refugees from homes, fields and 
orange groves; it also unsettled deep-seated cultural constructions of time and continuity that are 
uniquely exemplified in the agrarian rhythms of the land. This rupture in time, therefore, was 
both historical and cultural, with the use of chronology advancing the traumatic event into a 
symbol while signifying its magnitude in relation to the post-1974 epoch. Although we realize 
that 1974 does not carry the same international cultural capital as 9/11, our purposeful use of it in 
the title echoes its cultural significance in constructing a horrendous event that was beyond 
comparison with any other disastrous event in the island’s history. In turn, Greek Cypriot 
narratives foster a nostalgic view toward the pre-modern pre-1974 status quo that leads to a 
nearly messianic expectation of restoring the lost grace of that era as part of the future. As Bryant 
(2008) notes, this is a point of divergence between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot readings 
of the past: while for Turkish Cypriot readings history reached a turning point in 1974, for Greek 
Cypriot readings, history remains to achieve its closure in the future – as part of a final 
settlement of the Cyprus issue.  

The question of the unpredictability of 1974 as a horrendous event is also important in 
constructing it as cultural trauma. On the one hand, Greek Cypriot narratives of history often 
present 1974 as the epitome of the island’s inescapable destiny in being successively occupied by 
different peoples (Christou, 2007). On the other hand, the question of responsibility or the issue 
of ‘who started it’ (see Smelser, 2004) can expose deep ideological rifts in the Greek Cypriot 
                                                                                                                                                             

‘refugee-like situation’ (see Zetter, 1994) the term refugee—along with its connotations of social status and 
identity—has prevailed in Greek discourse. The Greek Cypriot refugees’ plight has been aptly documented – 
including the documentary “Attilas 1974” by internationally renowned director Mihalis Kakogiannis, a native of 
Cyprus.  

 

 

209

political landscape (Mavratsas, 1997; Papadakis, 1993; 1998). But in dominant commemorations 
of 1974, events are presented as a shock, as something that could not have been predicted or 
contained. Thus, the brutality of the uprootedness is established in its departure from the normal 
course of history, regardless of the political events that could have served as a warning. The 
president’s reference to the ‘treacherous coup’ that preceded the Turkish invasion alludes to a 
controversial causality in which the military coup that overthrew the Greek government was 
linked to Greek Cypriot extremists’ attempt against the Cyprus president’s life which then 
precipitated the invasion events.  

 Furthermore, the longing for the day of return functions as a response to the suffering 
caused by the sudden uprooting and maintains a positive vision for the future. Despite tangible 
signs of adaptation in their new social and economic structures of exile, aided not only by 
various social provisions such as housing and health care but also by a largely supportive 
population of co-ethnics in the south, Greek Cypriot refugees have always maintained the hope 
that one day they will be allowed to return just as they were unexpectedly forced to leave (Loizos 
and Constantinou, 2007). Even after decades of ‘protracted exile’ this deep belief in the ‘myth of 
return’ (Zetter, 1999) is guided by a sense of inconceivable injustice perpetrated upon them and a 
metaphysical faith in divine justice. 

For example, the Rotary Club of Nicosia – Salamis, one of the Rotary clubs of the island 

founded by internally displaced professionals from the city of Famagusta (currently in the 
occupied part) has enshrined the longing for a day of return in the prayer that precedes each club 
meeting:  
 

Oh God, our Lord, 
We  pray  you  bless  this  meeting  and  strengthen  us  in  our  deeds  of  love  and 
benevolence. Also, our Lord, we ask you to deliver speedily our beloved country 
Cyprus  from  the  sufferings  of  foreign  aggression  and  grant  that  its  indigenous 
population live in peace and security, praising thy holy name.195 
 

This yearning for the day of return is also evident in the discursive shifts in the post-1974 Greek 
Cypriot political rhetoric. Since the early 19th century Greek Cypriots had expressed a desire for 
enosis (union with Greece) which later prompted the corresponding Turkish Cypriot demand for 
taksim (partition) of the island. After 1974, however, the enosis demand was abandoned and any 
lingering sentiments for enosis that had been officially or unofficially expressed by Greek 
Cypriots were effectively silenced (Mavratsas, 1996, 1997; Attalides, 1979; Markides, 1977; 
Stamatakis, 1991). This was followed by the vision of a unified island where Greek Cypriots and 
Turkish Cypriots would live in harmony. However, this supposedly harmonic pre-1974 reality 
clearly differs from the Turkish Cypriot experience which was punctuated by isolation. 
Regardless, Greek Cypriots abandoned the enosis vision in order to construct this mythical day 
of return that will heal the “1974” cultural trauma. 

Furthermore, this myth of return is galvanized by the idealization of the pre-1974 period 

as the paradise of simple and blissful life (Zetter, 1994, 1999; Dikomitis 2004; Loizos, 1981). 
Greek Cypriot refugees—and, to a certain extend, all Greek Cypriots—describe the occupied 
                                                 
195 http://www.rotary-cyprus.org/~nic-salamis/, retrieved March 25, 2009. The city of Famagusta (Ammochostos in 

Greek) used to be the largest city in pre-1974 Cyprus. Since the invasion, its Greek Cypriot inhabitants were 
displaced mainly to Nicosia, Larnaca and Limassol. The old part of the city was sealed off by the Turkish forces, 
and the city has become a ghost town.  

 

210

areas as the most beautiful, scenic and picturesque part of the island. Just like it is not 
appropriate to speak ill of the dead, Greek Cypriots refrain from saying anything negative about 
the areas under occupation or even remembering negative occasions in those areas; except, of 
course, from the events of 1974. Nothing compares to a refugee’s occupied home: everything 
before 1974 was good, everything after, is bad (Loizos and Constantinou, 2007). This has 
burdened the idea of return with unrealistic expectations. As Zetter (1999: 6) has pointed out: 
“What is mythologized, is what has been left behind and what, it is hoped, return will 
accomplish—the belief that ‘home’, both as a material and symbolic entity, can be restored as it 
was before exile”. 

The mythological status of a ‘day of return’ that would uplift the rootlessness of 

modernity has also contributed to the elevation of those “left behind” (that is, those who did not 
leave their houses in order to move to the southern part of the island) into a special symbolic 
status. These are referred to as “enclaved” [englovismenoi] Greek Cypriots who have become 
emblems of the resistance against uprooting. Their everyday struggle is commended and 
commemorated officially by the state and unofficially in the media and other sites of cultural 
production. Appealing to the European Court of Human Rights, the Republic of Cyprus 
government achieved a vote which condemned Turkey for 14 violations of the European 
Convention of Human rights, 7 of which refer to the living conditions of the “enclaved” Greek 
Cypriots (Cyprus Versus Turkey, application no.25781/94, May 10 2001).   
 
Into the Mundane: Everyday Rituals of “1974”  

Cultural traumas are established with the identification of a horrendous event and 

solidified through commemorative practices that transform the event into personal and collective 
memory. In this section we aim to show how this trauma is experienced through the discursive, 
representational and institutional practices that established the commemoration of those events 
not simply as an annual ritual but as an everyday routine that ritualizes the very act of 
remembering the trauma. In a multitude of sites that range from official ones – such the Republic 
of Cyprus’ educational system or state legislation– to unofficial ones – such as the refugee 
associations and kinship groups – the trauma of 1974 has been constructed not as a historical 
event but as a present day trauma that derives its urgency from an unresolved political problem.  

The Greek Cypriot educational system has significantly contributed to the ritualization 

and routinization of “1974” through the cross-curricular goal of the “I don’t forget” (Den 
Ksechno) objective. The slogan “I don’t forget” was originally created by writer and advertising 
director Nikos Dimou, on the very day of the Turkish military intervention in 1974. Succinct and 
solemn, and accompanied by a visual image of a bleeding island (see image below), it became 
the symbol of the invasion trauma (see http://www.ndimou.gr/kypros_gr.asp). It has been since 
duplicated in numerous official and unofficial sites both in Greece and the Republic of Cyprus as 
a visual representation of commemoration and resistance and it is by far the most successful 
visual image that has enshrined the notion of “1974” as a trauma at the level of popular culture.  

 

 

 

 

211

The presence of the ‘I don’t forget’ logo in schools complements a cross-course 

educational goal of transferring the traumatic memory of “1974” to the new generation. Whereas 
there is no particular course devoted to the 1974 events, the whole curriculum, from kindergarten 
to the last year of Lyceum (ages 4-17) is infused with references to the problem of occupation. A 
familiar ritual in Greek Cypriot schools every September is the decoration of classrooms with 
landscape pictures of the northern occupied areas of the island and the distribution of student 
workbooks that feature these locations on the cover. The phrase “I don’t forget and I struggle” is 
inscribed prominently on classroom boards as teachers hang the pictures on the walls and 
identify on the Cyprus map the location of northern occupied villages and cities. The principals’ 
welcoming remarks and the Minister’s address to all students that is read on the first school 
assembly invariably include references to the problem of occupation in Cyprus and the desire to 
return to these areas and reunify the island. For example, in 2006 the Minister wrote: “In these 
difficult conditions of the 21st century world, our homeland is waging its own struggle to 
achieve, through peaceful means, the liberation of our occupied areas that have been under the 
foot of the Turkish Attila [Turkish army] for the past 32 years.”196  In 2008 the Minister’s 
address included similar remarks: “Unfortunately, this new school year finds Cyprus divided by 
occupation. I hope that this will be the last year.” 197 

Educators seize every opportunity to bring up references to the problem of occupation, 

whether talking about Arbor Week—references to the natural resources of the occupied part—or 
Easter Week—the occupation of Cyprus compared to Christ’s persecution and crucifixion. The 
“I don’t forget” objective is registered as the primary goal ‘under emphasis’ every new school 
year and it saturates all aspects of the curriculum by functioning not as a distant historical event 
but as a current cultural issue that has touched the lives of all Greek Cypriots. Essay 
competitions and art exhibits regularly call students to narrate and illustrate the suffering of 
1974: students write about the beauty of the occupied villages and the pain and longing of 
refugees; they draw picturesque landscapes of the areas they have not visited and portray the 
suffering of the mothers of the missing persons.  

The focus of this curricular goal is decidedly emotional rather than anything related to the 

specific events preceding or following the 1974 Turkish invasion. In fact, teachers avoid any 
references to episodes around the Turkish invasion that may taint this monochromatic view of 
history and they steer clear of any references to ‘dangerous memories’ that may challenge the 
view that Greek Cypriots were the absolute victims of the island’s recent history (Christou, 
2007). School fieldwork studies have documented the nature of the “I don’t forget” curriculum 
that narrates suffering only from a Greek Cypriot perspective and serves to maintain stark 
contrasts between ‘Us’ and ‘Others’ (Spyrou, 2001; 2002; Philippou, 2005; Christou, 2006). This 
construction of the absolute evil and the absolute victim is a necessary step in the assembly of a 
tragic narrative that becomes an iconic event of suffering for a social group (Alexander, 2004b). 
Thus, “1974” is educationally re-enacted as a cultural trauma through narrative, aesthetic 

and religious performances that routinize an exceptional event into an everyday recurrent 
experience for all Greek Cypriots. It could be argued that the “I don’t forget” objective is a 
paradoxical, if not an impossible goal: It demands that new generations identify with the memory 
and the suffering of events not personally experienced. But it is precisely this paradox that makes 
“1974” an exemplary cultural trauma – for it has to a large extent succeeded in imparting its 
                                                 
196 From http://www.schools.ac.cy/dde/circular/data/Doc5039.pdf, retrieved April 10, 2009 
197 From http://www.schools.ac.cy/dde/circular/data/Doc7390.pdf, retrieved April 10, 2009 
 

 

212

The trauma of 1974 is evoked not only in the commemoration of the day of the 1974 

emotional impact to younger generations. Even though students’ reactions to the “I don’t forget” 
curriculum can range from a sense of obligation to the concern that the larger society is not 
identified with the trauma anymore, the younger generation reflects on “1974” with a sense of 
sacred responsibility (Christou, 2006). As Alexander (2004a) argues, cultural traumas allow 
members of the wider public to participate in other people’s pain and thus, create new avenues of 
social incorporation. This can also be seen in the transformation of the phrase from “I don’t 
forget” in the 1970s and 1980s, to the most recent (1990s) “I don’t forget and I struggle” or even 
in some cases “I know, I don’t forget and I struggle”; clearly aimed at creating a clearer sense of 
identification with the cultural trauma. 
 
invasion; a day that is commemorated by Greek Cypriot authorities as a sad anniversary and by 
Turkish Cypriot authorities as a day of deliverance, complete with a military parade and with the 
participation of state dignitaries from mainland Turkey. Rather, the presence of the 1974 trauma 
is strong and colors all anniversaries as such. A case in point is the celebration of March 25 – the 
anniversary of Greek independence that is promptly celebrated by Greek Cypriots as a 
celebration that marks their symbolic inclusion into the Greek nation. March 25 is both a 
religious and a secular national holiday for the day is also Annunciation Day in the Greek 
Orthodox calendar. It was originally selected to coincide with the anniversary of the 1821 Greek 
revolution for its potent symbolic character: the birth of Christ is but a metaphor for the birth of 
modern Greece (see Roudometof, 2005). What is of particular significance in the Cypriot context 
though and what marks off this celebration in Cyprus – as opposed to mainland Greece – is its 
strong connection to a day of return to the lost homelands. In March 25 2009, for example, in 
one of the speeches delivered in one of the churches of the Nicosia metropolitan area, the priest 
made explicit and clear-cut references to “1974”. “We must endure” he said, “and keep our faith 
to God in order to go through these difficult times.” Hope of return to “our ancestral homelands” 
should not be abandoned, and the faithful should hold fast to their belief that, with the help of 
God, this will be accomplished. 198 What is important here is evocation of such a day of return in 
the context of a completely unrelated national holiday – a striking connection gone unnoticed by 
Greek Cypriots but immediately visible to non-natives.  

The same belief is manifested in the University of Cyprus’ commemorations of March 

25. Typical commemorative celebrations conclude with the signing of the Cretan folk song “Pote 
tha Kanei xasteria” (Πότε θα κάμει ξαστεριά). The folk song has gone through a native 
adaptation whereby its original place names have been replaced by references to the refugees’ 
regions – Kerynia, the mountain of Pentadaktylus, Mofru and so on. In its reinterpretation the 
song goes as this:  
 
«Πότε θα κάνει ξαστεριά,  
πότε θα φλεβαρίσει,  
να κατεβώ στον Όλυμπο,  
στην έμορφη Κερύνεια  
στη Μόρφου και στη Μεσαριά,  
σ’ όλη την Καρπασία  
να δω τον Πενταδάκτυλο  
να μου χαμογελάει..  
Πότε θα κάνει ξαστεριά...»  
                                                 
198 The quotes are based on participant observation by one of the authors.  

 

213

 
How long till clear sky  
How long until February comes around 
To walk down from (Mt.) Olympus  
To the beautiful Kerynia 
To Morfu and Mesaria  
To all of Karpasia  
To see Pentadaktylus  
Smile to me  
How long till clear sky. . . 199  
 
Hence, in the context of a celebration unrelated to “1974” as such the event resurfaces in all its 
potency: Not only is the event forcefully altering the nature of the occasion in the Cypriot 
context (versus the March 25 celebrations within the Greek state) but it becomes the dominant 
point of reference in local discourse.    

The cultural trauma of 1974 can further be identified in everyday rituals that attempt to 

symbolically reconstruct the lost home in the context of temporary refugee housing. When Greek 
Cypriot refugees fled from their homes in July and August of 1974 many believed that the 
military intervention would be temporary given that Turkey had attempted to intervene in Cyprus 
already since the 1960s. So, most refugees did not pack any belongings as they believed that they 
would return home in a matter of days. But when they narrate their experiences many years and 
decades after the event, Greek Cypriot refugees begin their stories by emphasizing the sudden 
and unforeseen displacement that forced them to leave without taking anything with them: “We 
left with nothing, just what we were wearing” is a common opening line. The meaning of 
‘nothing’ in this phrase implies that the body is left exposed because of its dislocation from its 
context. According to Connerton (1989) the body is the main vehicle of habitual memory 
because through ritual bodily performances the collective shared history is transformed into a 
deeply personal experience. In this way, commemorative rituals exercise a bodily discipline that 
re-inscribes the event through the “mnemonics of the body” (Connerton, 1989: 9).  

The refugees’ rituals, therefore, often attempt to re-contextualize the body in the foreign 

environment: they build an identical fireplace as the one they had “back home” or plant an 
orange tree in their small backyard to take care of it as they used to do before becoming refugees. 
The refugees reclaim their lost past through everyday routines that maintain the traditional social 
bonds of the pre-1974 life (Zetter, 1999). These punctuate everyday conversations of Greek 
Cypriots and their stories are inevitably always connected to the cultural trauma of 1974. The 
reminders can be as mundane as the aroma of oranges—which, refugees are quick to say that 
they do not taste the same as the ones they grew back home—or as generalized as the bitterness 
of being the world’s forgotten victims of human rights violations. Through these discursive and 
bodily performances of recollecting & symbolically reconstituting the occupied home and land, 
refugees and their families routinely evoke the horrendous event of 1974 and make it part of the 
routine of everyday life on the island.  

Following the immediate events of the summer of 1974, and when it became apparent 

that return would not be easily achieved, a large number of refugee associations were established 
in the south—generally one association for every village or city. Not only do these associations 
                                                 
199 Translation by the authors. There are numerous variants of this folk song. Within Greece, it is often related to 

hardcore Greek nationalist circles.  

 

214

draw attention to the centrality of kinship structure and place of origin as cultural markers of 
membership, but they also serve the purpose of creating a geographical reference point to the lost 
land. All such communities have established refugee associations in the Greek-controlled post-
1974 Republic of Cyprus. Their function is to keep the dispersed population in touch through 
religious and national celebrations, thereby maintaining a sense of origin and preventing 
dissolution of the original village unit. Refugees regularly attend the weddings and funerals of 
co-villagers wherever they may be taking place in the southern part of the island. Death notices 
in the newspaper, tombstones and wedding invitations always identify the family’s origin in the 
occupied part followed by their current, ‘temporary’ residence (Zetter, 1994).  

Furthermore, the post-1974 designation and institutionalization of the refugee label has 
created the conditions for the universalization of the refugees´ loss and the possibility that all 
Greek Cypriots could identify with the pain of uprootedness. That is, official legislation enacted 
on September 19, 1974 (Ministry Council decision 13.503) 200 specifies that a “refugee” is a 
person who before and up to July 1974 permanently resided in an area that is currently under 
Turkish occupation. The decision was amended in 1995 to include those who owned land and 
property in the occupied part even if their permanent residence at the time of the invasion was in 
the areas that remained under the control of the Republic of Cyprus. The legislation—
accompanied by the bureaucracy of refugee identification cards and related documentation—has 
offered to refugees specific advantages such as, access to low cost government housing estates, 
financial aid for building a house or purchasing an apartment and renting allowances. Their 
status is inherited patrimonially—but not matrimonially—thereby reassuring the continued 
construction of generations of refugees for several decades after the event. Intermarriage further 
reassures that the refugee status is diffused throughout the Greek Cypriot community, and 
therefore its existence becomes part of the fabric of all Greek Cypriots—even for those who 
were not personally affected.  

The nature of the victim is therefore not limited to the individuals directly affected by the 

invasion but is relayed as the generalized Greek Cypriot victim of Turkish military aggression. 
The president’s opening quote comes from a speech given on Saint Charalambos’ celebration—
the patron saint of the occupied village of Kontea—that the Kontea refugees organized to 
commemorate the religious day. The president addressed the refugees by connecting the 
religious commemoration to the commemoration of 1974 and the struggle for solution to the 
Cyprus issue: “Today,” he said, “Kontea celebrates its patron Saint Charalambos. But, the 
President went on, “Kontea also honors her children who were killed during the tragedy of 1974. 
[…] Kontea does not forget and, in the endless bitterness of refugeehood and uprooting, it resists, 
it hopes and it anticipates.”  

It is plain that even after decades of “protracted exile” there is a strong sense of 

inconceivable injustice perpetrated upon the natives. This sense of injustice is coupled with a 
metaphysical faith in the possibility of divine justice to foster a deep-seeded belief in the ‘myth 
of return’ (Zetter, 1999). To understand why 1974 has been encoded as such a pervasive cultural 
trauma it is necessary to refer to the radical social, political and economic transformations of the 
second half of the 20th century. Following transition from British colonial status to the 1960 
founding of the Republic of Cyprus, the island’s economy functioned, for the first time, under 
the status of an independent state and slowly began to expand its agricultural and tourism sectors. 
                                                 
200 More at 

http://www.mfa.gov.cy/mfa/mfa2006.nsf/All/5C42EAB55AEA9A5EC22571B0003E0AF5?OpenDocument, 
retrieved April 16, 2009. 

 

215

The 1963-1974 interethnic conflicts and the Turkish Cypriots’ withdrawal from the government 
fostered uncertainty but also increased the socio-economic gap between the two groups, with 
Greek Cypriots advancing more than Turkish Cypriots (Kedourie, 2005). The major and abrupt 
setback was the 1974 events that brought all major functions of the economy to a halt. Nicosia’s 
airport, the only airport on the island at the time, was caught in the buffer zone between the two 
sides while a third of the population lost its entire livelihood means and the tourist industry’s 
major hubs came under Turkish military occupation. For Greek Cypriots, this bode a future of 
dark economic times but with a steady stream of foreign aid the economy in the South recovered 
at an unprecedented rate during the 1980s—a development that has been dubbed as ‘The Cyprus 
Miracle’ (Christodoulou 1992). It is important to emphasize, however, that this was not the fate 
of the northern part of the island inhabited by Turkish Cypriots. The lack of an internationally 
recognized status caused the economy to suffer and development has been at a much slower rate. 
As a result, for Greek Cypriots who experienced these wild swings of personal and social 
misfortune, the pre-1974 reality has been the subject of romanticized post-1974 reconstructions 
and of the nostalgia expressed for a tradition unfettered by the problems and complications of the 
post-1974 modernization 
 
Trauma Transmission: Facing the Challenges of Time 

The intergenerational dynamics that weave narratives of loss and suffering in the context 
of the family are important sites in the construction of the 1974 cultural trauma. Cultural trauma 
theory examines the practices of collective memory production and transference to the next 
generation. Influenced by Durkheim’s argument on the centrality of social and group realities 
that provide resonance and authority to collective representations (Fowler, 2005), Halbwachs’ 
(1941/1992) groundbreaking work on collective memory posed that we recall, recognize and 
localize our memories in a societal context. An essential aspect of social solidarity, collective 
memory is located in the interrelations of groups such as the family or the social class. 201 

 For Halbwachs the interests, concerns and problems of the present also shape collective 

memory. Greek Cypriot refugees’ stories about the occupied part have been a perpetual 
connection between the past and the present. Second generation refugees, that is, those born to 
refugee families after 1974, grew up exposed to vivid accounts of the lost land and have adopted, 
to a large extend, a refugee identity (Hadjiyanni, 2002). First generation refugees have always 
expressed their collective anxiety for the erosion of the memory of the occupied land and they 
see their stories as a way to maintain alive the desire for return. These family narratives mediate 
symbolically between the past and the present and create meanings that connect parents and 
children (Hinchman and Hinchman, 1997). The telling of traumatic stories is a way of structuring 
                                                 
201 The interdisciplinary surge of interest in memory studies is fueled both by events that have generated a 

‘commemorative fever’ in the 1980s and 1990s but also by the booming of cultural artifacts (film, photography, 
internet media, artificial memory storage) that facilitate the collective processes of bringing the past into the 
present (Misztal, 2003). Huyssen (2003) argues that whereas 20th century nation states sought to monumentalize 
national history, today we witness a fascination with the processes of remembering and forgetting. Utopian 
visions of the future, the staple of the first half of the 20th century, have given way to the appeal of the past and 
what he calls a ‘hypertrophy of memory’. This is evident in the rise of visual cultures of documenting and 
commemorating the past as well as architectural creations that monumentalize cultural traumas. For an overview 
of recent perspectives, see Roudometof (2007).  

 

 

216

experience and producing meaning out of disparate or incomprehensible events (Ricoeur, 1988). 
Children of refugee families ‘remember’ the occupied part and identify with their parents’ pain: 
 

I saw a dream that Cyprus was, I saw the shape of Cyprus in the form of trees. […] 
And my mother told me that maybe when I was younger and I was listening about it 
all the time, I created a picture of it in my mind, so it wasn’t a dream. But I believed 
that I saw it. I feel very strongly that I saw it. And my mother told me that this place 
was on route to Apostolos Andreas.  Nasia, 15 years old 
During  the  summer  when  I  see  the  orange  trees,  I  remember  the  oranges  of 
Ammochostos. Ore when we have the flower festival in Larnaca, I remember that we 
used to have the same in Ammochostos.  Maria, 16 years old 
In our family gatherings, we talk about the invasion.  And I hear how [my father] 
talks about the people who are lost and the people who were killed and I see him cry.  
And that's when you think, ‘Why did they do this to us?’  And no one cares about it.  
[…] He talks about Kerynia where they sent all the soldiers and lined them up.  It’s 
difficult to know that you may lose your husband or your father or your child, your 
son. Eleni, 16 years old202 

 
Nasia, Maria and Eleni have never been to Apostolos Andreas or Famagusta (Ammochostos) or 
Kerynia but their ‘memories’ of the occupied areas sound as vivid as any personal account can 
be. In the first narrative, the dream is a surreal account of an experience that has not taken place 
and it symbolizes the metaphorical dream of return even if the return will only be a first 
experience for Nasia. The younger generation of refugees has internalized these memories to the 
extent that the word ‘remember’ is used in a way that collapses the limits between personal and 
collective memory. As these narratives saturate everyday family encounters, the younger 
generation is left with a heavy legacy of memory and the burden to realize the mythical return. 
Nevertheless, the second generation’s emotional connection with their occupied homes is less 
identified with the idealization of the past and more with the idealization of a future where the 
restoration of the human rights of property and freedom of movement can finally materialize 
(Zetter, 1999). 

On the other hand, the post-1974 economic realities on the island have conditioned 
different kinds of expectations for the new generation of Greek Cypriots. Cyprus became a 
member of the European Union in 2004, in an awkward agreement that recognizes suspension of 
EU law in the northern part of the island currently not under the control of the Republic of 
Cyprus. The 35-year-old shift from refugee tents to a booming economy is met with a collective 
Greek Cypriot pride for the hard-working ethic that paid off. Nevertheless, the new comforts 
became an uncomfortable reality that contradicts the need to maintain the ‘fighting spirit’ for a 
solution to the Cyprus problem (Christou, 2006). The younger generation exemplifies a 
materialist turn that, for the older generation, is at odds with the existential need to preserve this 
‘fighting spirit’: 

 
The new generation… grew up with more luxuries. They didn’t go through the 
experience of being a refugee. They didn’t have the experience of living in a tent and 
have the tent leak during the winter and you don’t know where to sleep. We spent two 
months in a bus and we were sleeping on the seats—from my grandfather to the 

                                                 
202 Excerpts from interviews with children of refugee families, Christou (2002). 

 

217

youngest child—two months! We are another generation. We went through this 
hardship. But… these kids are used to luxury and so they get used to easy money. And 
the parents give money too easily because they were deprived of it growing up.203 

 
The younger generation, therefore, is constructed as the promise of the nation and as a potential 
obstacle in maintaining the fight for return. In this sense, the cultural trauma depends on the 
strength of the intergenerational dynamic that sustains it. As already discussed in the previous 
section, the refugee family has been an important site for the commemoration and generational 
transference of the refugee trauma.  

And yet, when compared to the generation that actually experienced coexistence with 
Turkish Cypriots, the younger Greek Cypriot generation is more inclined to show a preference 
for separation (for statistics, see Webster, 2005; Georgiades, 2007). The same generational 
pattern was also observed in the 2004 Annan Plan referendum with higher rates of negative 
Greek Cypriot votes by those born after 1974 compared to the previous generation (Webster, 
2005). This was a paradox to many observers, as the evidence overturned simplistic accounts of 
collective conflict predicated upon personal animosity. From within the lenses of cultural trauma 
theory, though, the result simply registers the successful routinization and reproduction of 
“1974” as a cultural trauma. For the reader of the preceding pages, it should not come as a 
surprise that those who lack personal remembrance of the pre-1974 reality will be the least 
inclined toward inter-communal coexistence. How and under what circumstances can the “1974” 
trauma be left behind?  

The normative implications generated by the routinization of the “1974” cultural trauma 

can also be seen in the events that challenge its educational primacy. For example, an August 
2008 circular by the Ministry of Education identified the first goal of the new school year as 
follows: “The cultivation of a culture of peaceful coexistence, mutual respect and collaboration 
between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots with the goal of removing occupation and 
reuniting our homeland and our people.”204 For the first time since 1974, the Ministry’s 
leadership outlined the vision of an educational system that nurtures a culture of reconciliation 
between the two main communities on the island; a goal that should be expected, especially 
given the fact that re-unification has been the explicit and expressed political goal of the Greek 
Cypriot community as well as the official position of the Republic of Cyprus. The circular 
however, caused heated reactions by teachers’ unions which claimed that the already burdened 
curriculum cannot support an additional goal that may be difficult to implement. The elementary 
school teachers’ union POED said that schools should not be forced to visit Turkish Cypriot 
institutions in the north and argued—as the head of POED claimed in an interview for a Greek 
television channel205—that such actions can ‘confuse’ 8-year-old children and hurt teachers’ and 
parents’ ‘sensitivities’.  

In an open letter to teachers the union pointed out that given the ‘realities’ in Cyprus, “the 
goal of ‘I know, I don’t forget and I struggle’ remains a permanent objective under emphasis, to 
underscore the struggle of our educational system to liberate and reunite our homeland.” Irony 
and blatant contradictions aside, it is important to note the language of emotional appeal—
confusion, sensibilities—that registers a resistance to desecrate the cultural trauma by diluting its 
                                                 
203 Excerpt from interview with a refugee mother (Christou, 2002). 
204 From http://www.schools.ac.cy/dde/circular/data/Doc7387.pdf retrieved April 17, 2009. 
205 The full 15 minute report on “Cyprus History Lessons” by Sky News can be found at 

http://www.skai.gr/master_avod.php?id=115439&cid=61569&bc=61569&lsc=1, retrieved March 29, 2009. 

 

218

emotional strength. It also illustrates the compulsory return to the trauma drama (Alexander, 
2004b) which emphasizes the possibility that “1974” or any cultural trauma could happen again. 
In April 2003, the Turkish Cypriot leadership, under mounting popular pressure from the 
declining economic situation in the north, decided to lift the ban on movement across the Green 
Line. This meant that, for the first time in 29 years, Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots would 
be able to visit the areas that were largely inaccessible to them. This almost surprising turn of 
events challenged not only existing understandings of the political will of the other side but also 
the supposedly shared comprehension of terms such as ‘state’ and ‘authority’ (Demetriou, 2007). 
Some cynical comments by Greek Cypriots in the early days contended that the Turkish Cypriot 
leadership’s shrewd move served to politically elevate the appearance of ‘good will’ for a 
solution to the Cyprus problem while creating the conditions for Greek Cypriots to swallow the 
reality of division and thus eliminate the problem itself. The idea was that Greek Cypriots facing 
their dilapidated houses or entering them as visitors of new (Turkish) owners will give up on the 
hope of return and reunification of the island. 

Crossing the Green line to visit the hitherto inaccessible northern part of the island was 

subject to a variety of interpretations. For some, outright refusal was the only dignified response 
because Turkish Cypriot authorities forced all those who wish to cross to display their ID papers. 
This turned natives into “tourists” to their own land (Dikomitis, 2005). Others, though, were 
moved more by material considerations, opting to cross the Green line in search of cheaper 
goods and services. To these two diametrically opposed interpretations, it is necessary to add a 
third and perhaps more widespread interpretation of crossing. For many Greek Cypriot refugees, 
crossing the buffer zone became an act of pilgrimage (Dikomitis, 2004. 2005). As Dikomitis 
(2004) points out, the refugees literally moved the earth by collecting water and soil to take back 
with them. Their visits to the occupied areas became a ritual of visiting their house, the church 
and the cemetery. They collected soil from the graves and anointed themselves with the water 
running at the center of the village. Parents came with children who have never seen their 
ancestral lands and who were told repeatedly of these lost territories.  

Crossing the Green line entailed elements of sacralization of these territories which in 
turn maintained the mythologization of the island’s occupied part. These visits were also short 
lived experiments that did not confirm expectations for a widening inter-communal relationship. 
Over time, the number of visits dropped significantly:  Once visited, the promised lands of the 
north returned to their mythological status as an imaginary topos for Greek Cypriots.  

This imaginary topos is not located solely in a different space but also in a different time. 

For example, in a newspaper article206 titled ‘Mores and Customs of Christmas and New Year: 
Nostalgia for Tradition’ (December 27, 2009), a Greek Cypriot woman details the making of 
traditional sweets and the Christmas family rituals of the past. The woman and her husband 
reminisce the days when these customs were authentically practiced, when people were pure 
enough to appreciate their significance and poor enough to be grateful for a pair of pants and a 
piece of warm pastry. The opening lines set the narrative in the context of ‘traditional 
grandmothers’ of Paralimni who ‘reminisce their childhood years and the festive days in 
Rizokarpaso, Varosi and Kerynia’. Without naming them as such, the article is situated in the 
nostalgia of older refugee women for the past—a pre-1974 past, rife with tradition and the 
virtues of simple life. The article ends with the following words: 
 
                                                 
206 Politis newspaper, 27 December, 2009 at http://www.politis-news.com/cgibin/hweb?-A=843521&-V=archive&-

w=ΗΘΗ@ΚΑΙ@ΕΘΙΜΑ@&-P 

 

219

Ms Androula, on the other hand, feels that as faithfully as she tries to preserve these 
customs she can never be as happy as she used to be in Karpasi [occupied area]. ‘I 
believe that refugeehood has left a bitterness inside us and it is difficult for us to be 
joyful  and  carefree  like  the  old  days’,  says  Ms  Androula  expressing  her  grievance 
and wishing that warmth and peace can return to people’s hearts, in a Cyprus that is 
free and reunited. 

 
Just like the president’s talk professed a break from ‘age-old habits and folkloric traditions’ 
caused by the invasion, the article assembles a narrative of double-coded loss where the 
refugees’ memories of the occupied part are the memories of tradition. Thus, the 1974 events are 
recounted as a break from tradition, the loss of innocence and the pain of losing both a home and 
a heaven of pure, authentic life. In this way, the occupied areas become a time capsule that holds 
not only the answer to happiness but also the solution to the crisis of identity, signified by the 
endangered traditions. Ms Androula laments the inability of the new generation to appreciate the 
laboring process of home-baked goods or the significance of a simple gift made with love. Even 
though she follows these customs with ‘religious piety’ in order to transfer tradition to her 
children and grandchildren, she also feels that in the current context of consumerism and 
material abundance it is difficult for anyone to experience the spirit of the good old days. 
 
Conclusions 
 
This paper begins with the assumption that the events of 1974 possess the potential but not the 
proof that their experience would be traumatizing. In other words, the cultural trauma of 1974 
cannot be objectively deduced from an equation of suffering but it has to be understood through 
the social processes that construct an event as traumatic not only for the present but also for 
future generations. As we explain, there is no escape from “1974” in Cyprus even though the 
manifestations of its commemoration differ depending on which side of the buffer zone one is 
located. For Greek Cypriots who live in the southern part of the island, “1974” is a haunting 
cultural trauma that is impossible to ignore whereas for Turkish Cypriots the events of 1974 have 
concluded the process of inter-communal separation (see Bryant, 2008). In this paper, our 
objective has been confined to discussing the specificity of the Greek Cypriot cultural trauma.  
We argued that for Greek Cypriots “1974” is a horrendous event that stands outside the 

scope of normal time. The articulation of the 1974 cultural trauma through the experience of 
uprootedness and the vision of a day of return is embodied in specific groups that have become 
emblematic of the trauma – these include the refugees, the missing persons and the “enclaved” in 
the north  As ultimate symbols of the trauma drama, these groups have become collective agents 
of the trauma process (Alexander, 2004a) by bearing the burden of narrating the pain and thus by 
inviting members of the wider Greek Cypriot community to identify with them. By functioning 
as metaphors for return (Cassia, 2005) they register the emotional trauma through their liminal 
states of uprootedness, homelessness and dis-embodiment. Thus, they reiterate the exceptionality 
of the 1974 event even as they become the everyday, mundane symbols of it.  

In the paper’s second part, we further sought to illustrate how “1974” is reproduced, 

evoked, represented in everyday rituals, in practices unrelated and seemingly far removed from 
politics. In so doing we aimed to offer examples where trauma is experienced at the very level of 
the mundane –where cultural trauma theory’s applicability has been questioned (Spillman, 

 

220

2005).  In this level, we see the routinization of trauma or its falling back into the background of 
social life. Its manifestations however continue to punctuate everyday conversations, practices 
and thoughts: Everything, from a presidential address to the watering of orange trees or the 
discursive and bodily practices and institutional routines (such as IDs and financial aid) that 
enshrine and reproduce the “refugee” label operate as constant reminders of the cultural trauma 
of “1974” on a daily basis. As such, these reminders become part of everyday routine, ritual and 
the taken – for – granted cultural milieu of the Republic of Cyprus. The identification of the post-
1974 military occupation of part of the island with the loss of folkways and tradition in general 
universalizes the trauma beyond the loss of property and mirrors the two processes as one. As the 
occupied areas become emblematic of tradition, the invasion of 1974 is narrated as the invasion 
of modernity that unsettled people, mores and fundamental identity values. The pain of loss and 
the desire for return are, therefore, a cultural urgency for return to tradition.  

But the trauma’s hold is not restricted to the generation of those who have personally 
experienced the events of the summer of 1974. It extends to the totality of Greek Cypriots and 
most importantly to those who have been born after 1974 or who were too young to have 
personal memories of the events. Notwithstanding the religious undertones of a ‘fall from Eden’ 
the “return of the trauma narrative” is located in intergenerational dynamics that can only be 
understood as an all-consuming cultural framework, which refracts all societal changes in the 
prism of 1974. If life before the invasion is mythologized, the post-1974 context is vilified as 
national degeneration. For the older generation of Greek Cypriots “modern” is what came after 
1974 and is what threatens the memory of tradition and fuels the desire of return. 

While seemingly routine, the cultural trauma’s intergenerational transmission remains 
contested and consequential. In fact, in the second and third sections of this paper, we argued 
that the focus of official remembrance – under the “I don’t forget” slogan – has contributed to an 
extensive absorption into the collectivity’s own suffering, even to the detriment of endorsing the 
goal of coexistence with the Turkish Cypriots in a future re-unified Cyprus. For the younger 
generations experience the trauma unconnected to personal memory and simply as a cultural 
construct, whereby its resolution can be sought only in a future settlement that would fulfill the 
Greek Cypriot national objectives. The emotional burden of the cultural trauma for Greek 
Cypriots, therefore, is so extensive that it raises the community’s expectations of what would 
constitute an acceptable solution to island’s political troubles. We dare say that any successful 
solution of the Cyprus issue would need to offer not only practical solutions for dealing with the 
island’s problems of political governance but it would also need to heal the Greek Cypriots´ 
cultural trauma by restoring that community’s “fall from grace”.   
 
References  
 
Alexander, Jeffrey C. (2004a). “Toward a theory of cultural trauma.” In Jeffrey C. Alexander, 

Eyerman, R., Giesen, B., Smelser, N.J., and Sztompka, R. (Eds.) Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity, pp. 1-30. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Alexander, Jeffrey C. (2004b). “On the social construction of moral universals: the ‘Holocaust’ 

from war crime to trauma drama.” In Jeffrey C. Alexander, Eyerman, R., Giesen, B., 
Smelser, N.J., and Sztompka, R. (Eds.) Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity, pp. 196-
263. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Anastasiou, Harry (2002). Communication across conflict lines: The case of ethnically divided 

Cyprus. Journal of Peace Research, 39 (5): 581-596. 

 

221

Anderson, Benedict (1991) Imagined Communities. London: Verso (2nd edition). 
Attalides, Michael (1976). Forms of peasant incorporation in Cyprus during the last century. 

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 268: 363-378. 

Attalides, Michael (1979) Cyprus: Nationalism and International Politics. Edinburgh: Q Press. 
Bourdieu, Pierre (1989) “Social Space and Symbolic Power” Sociological Theory 7 (1) [Spring]: 

14-25.  

Bourdieu, Pierre (1990) The Logic of Practice. Stanford: Stanford University Press.  
Bryant, Rebecca (2002). The purity of spirit and the power of blood: a comparative perspective 
on nation, kinship and gender in Cyprus. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 8: 
509-530. 

Bryant, Rebecca (2008). Writing the Catastrophe: Nostalgia and Its Histories in Cyprus. Journal 

of Modern Greek Studies 26 (2): 399-422  

Cassia, Paul Sant (2005). Bodies of Evidence: Burial, Memory and the Recovery of Missing 

Persons in Cyprus. New York: Berghahn Books. 

Cassia, Paul Sant (2006). “Guarding each other’s dead, mourning one’s own: The problem of 

missing persons and missing pasts in Cyprus.” South European Society and Politics, 11 (1): 
111-128. 

Christodoulou, Demetrios (1992). Inside the Cyprus Miracle: The labours of an embattled mini-
economy. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press (Minnesota Mediterranean and 
East European Monographs). 

Christou, Miranda (2006). “A Double Imagination: Memory and Education in Cyprus,” Journal 

of Modern Greek Studies, 24 (2): 285-306 

Christou, Miranda (2007). “The Language of Patriotism: Sacred History and Dangerous 

Memories,” British Journal of Sociology of Education, 28 (6): 709-722. 

Cockburn, Cynthia (2004). The Line: Women, Partition and the Gender Order in Cyprus. New 

York: Zed Books. 

Connerton, Paul (1989). How Societies Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Demetriou, Olga (2006). “Freedom Square: The unspoken reunification of a divided city.” 

Hagar: Studies in Culture, Polity and Identities, 7 (1): 55-77. 

Demetriou, Olga (2007). “To cross or not to cross? Subjectivization and the absent state in 

Cyprus.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 13: 987-1006. 

Dikomitis, Lisa (2004). “A moving field: Greek Cypriot refugees returning ‘home’.” Durham 

Anthropology Journal, 12 (1): 7-20. 

Dikomitis, Lisa (2005) “Three Readings of a Border: Greek Cypriots Crossing the Green Line in 

Cyprus,” Anthropology Today 21 October (5): 7-12 

Fowler, Bridget (2005). “Collective Memory and Forgetting: Components for a Study of 

Obituaries.” Theory, Culture & Society, 22 (6): 53-72. 

Georgiades, Savvas D. (2007). “Public attitudes towards peace: The Greek Cypriot position.” 

Journal of Peace Research, 44 (5): 573-586. 

Hadjiyanni, Tasoulla (2002). The Making of a Refugee: Children Adopting Refugee Identity in 

Cyprus. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. 

Halbwachs, Maurice ([1941] 1992). On Collective Memory. Translation Lewis A. Coser. 

Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.  

 

222

Hinchman, Lewis P. and Sandra K. Hinchman (1997) “Introduction.” In L. P. Hinchman and S. 
K. Hinchman (Eds.) Memory, Identity, Community: The Idea of Narrative in the Human 
Sciences, Pp. iii–xxxii. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

Huyssen, Andreas (2003) Present Pasts: Urban Palimpsests and the Politics of Memory. 

California: Stanford University Press. 

Kedourie, Elie (2005) “The Cyprus Problem and Its Solution,” Middle Eastern Studies (41) 5 

[September]: 649-660  

Loizos, Peter (1975). The Greek Gift: Politics in a Cypriot Village. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Loizos, Peter (1981). The Heart Grown Bitter: A Chronicle of Cypriot War Refugees. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Loizos, Peter & Costas Constantinou (2007). “Hearts as well as Minds: Wellbeing and Illness 

among Greek Cypriot Refugees.” Journal of Refugee Studies, 20 (1): 86-107. 

Loizos, Peter & Evthymios Papataxiarchis (Eds.) (1991). Contested Identities: Gender and 

Kinship in Modern Greece. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Markides, Kyriakos (1977) The Rise and Fall of the Cyprus Republic. New Haven, CT: Yale 

University Press. 

Mavratsas, Ceasar V. (1996). “Approaches to Nationalism: Basic Theoretical Considerations in 
the Study of the Greek Cypriot Case and a Historical Overview.” Journal of the Hellenic 
Diaspora 22: 77-102. 

Mavratsas, Ceasar V. (1997). “The Ideological Contest between Greek-Cypriot nationalism and 
Cypriotism 1974-1995: Politics, Social Memory and Identity.” Ethnic and Racial Studies, 
20: 717-737. 

Misztal, Barbara A. (2003). Theories of Social Remembering. Maidenhead, Philadelphia: Open 

University Press. 

Papadakis, Yiannis (1993). The Politics of Memory and Forgetting in Cyprus. Journal of 

Mediterranean Studies, 3: 139-154. 

Papadakis, Yiannis (1998). “Greek Cypriot narratives of history and collective identity: 

nationalism as a contested process.” American Ethnologist 25(2): 149-165. 

Papadakis, Yiannis (2003). “Nation, narrative and commemoration: Political ritual in divided 

Cyprus.” History and Anthropology, 14 (3): 253-270. 

Philippou, Stavroula (2005). ‘‘Constructing National and European Identities: The Case of 

Greek-Cypriot Children.’’ Educational Studies 31 (3): 293–315. 

Ricoeur, Paul (1988) Time and Narrative. Vol. 3. Trans. Kathleen Blamey and David Pellauer. 

Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 

Rydgren, Jens (2007) “The Power of the Past: A Contribution to a Cognitive Sociology of Ethnic 

Conflict,” Sociological Theory (25) 3: 225-44 

Roudometof, Victor (2005) “National Commemorations in the Balkans,” pp. 35-59 in Michael 
Geisler (ed.), National Symbols, Fractured Identities: Contesting the National Narrative 
Hanover: University Press of New England. 

Roudometof, Victor (2007) “Collective Memory and Cultural Politics: An Introduction,” Journal 

of Political and Military Sociology (35) 1: 1-16 

 

223

Smelser, Neil, J. (2004). “September 11, 2001, as Cultural Trauma.” In Jeffrey C. Alexander, 
Eyerman, R., Giesen, B., Smelser, N.J., and Sztompka, R. (Eds.) Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity, pp. 264-282. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Spillman, Lyn (2005) “Is the ´Strong Program’ Strong Enough?” Culture: Newsletter of the 
Sociology of Culture Section of the American Sociological Association (19) 2: 1, 4-6.  
Spyrou, Spyros (2001). “Those on the other side: ethnic identity and imagination in Greek-

Cypriot children’s lives,” in: H. Schwartzman (Ed.) Children and anthropology: 
perspectives for the 21st century, pp. 167–185. Westport, CT, and London: Bergin & 
Garvey. 

Spyrou, Spyros (2002). “Images of ‘the other’: ‘the Turk’ in Greek-Cypriot children’s 

imaginations.” Race, Ethnicity and Education, 5 (3): 255–271. 

Stamatakis, Nikos A. (1991). “History and Nationalism: The Cultural Reconstruction of the 

Modern Greek Cypriot Identity.” The Cyprus Review 3 (1): 59-86. 

Webster, Craig (2005). “Division or unification in Cyprus? The role of demographics, attitudes, 
and party inclination on Greek Cypriot preferences for a solution to the Cyprus problem.” 
Ethnopolitics, 4 (3):299-309. 

Zetter, Roger (1999). “Reconceptualizing the Myth of Return: Continuity and Transition 

Amongst the Greek-Cypriot Refugees of 1974.” Journal of Refugee Studies, 12 (1): 1-22. 

Zetter, Roger (1994). “The Greek Cypriot Refugees: Perceptions of Return under Conditions of 

Protracted Exile.” International Migration Review, 28: 307-322. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

224

Ivana Spasić 
 
THE TRAUMA OF KOSOVO IN SERBIAN NATIONAL NARRATIVES 
 
A story about stories 

On the face of it, this is a perfect case of cultural trauma. If asked what distinguishes 
them as a nation, most Serbs would tell you it is the memory of the Battle of Kosovo, fought 
between the Serbian army and the forces of Ottoman Turks in 1389. Serbs lost the battle, and 
their prince was killed. The event marked the collapse of the medieval Serbian state and 
beginning of the long Ottoman domination. The Kosovo sore, wound or pain, as it is usually 
called in the “stories Serbs tell themselves about themselves” (Živković 2001a), that is, the 
aggrieved but proud feeling of tragedy, death and loss engendered by remembrance of the 
Kosovo catastrophe 600 years ago is generally held to be the foundation of Serbian identity, part 
of the very essence of being a Serb. Yet I will not start from the assertion that Kosovo as trauma 
is central to Serbianness, because this is precisely what needs to be examined. I will primarily be 
interested in how this claim has come to look so self-evident. 

“Kosovo” in Serbian national narratives is not a story of a thing, a place, or an event but, 

more than anything else, a story about stories. It is then appropriate to begin with two sets of 
statements, illustrating two broad types of accounts that purport to explain the link between 
Serbs and the symbolism of Kosovo.207  

 

I     

“The Battle of Kosovo is the symbol and mark of Serbian history. ... For the Serbian people, 
Kosovo is the imprint of its identity, the key through which to understand the message of its 
entire history, the banner of national freedom.” (Bogdanović 2006: 410) 
 
“That one event has imprinted itself indelibly on the Serbian soul forever. ... It is a simple matter 
of fact that, whenever Serbs are faced with events of great historical importance, they invariably 
turn to the one source of strength and inspiration – the Kosovo mystique.” (Mihailovich 1991: 
141) 
 
„It is on the tragic myth of a heroic sacrifice and the choice of the eternal life in the heavenly 
kingdom that the moral philosophy of the Serbian people has rested all the way to modern times. 
The ethic and spiritual principles of the Kosovo commitment were the foundation of the spiritual 
life of the entire Serbian people.“ (Palavestra 1991: 23) 
 
“Kosovo is many diverse things to different living Serbs, but they all have it in their blood. They 
are born with it. ... The question of why it is in Serbian blood is never meant to be answered – it is 
a transcendental phenomenon.” (Dragnich and Todorovich 1984: 4) 
 
“For centuries it has been as essential ingredient in the historical consciousness of the Serbian 
people. ... On the six hundredth anniversary of their nation’s Golgotha, Serbian people around the 
world pause to reflect once again on the meaning and impact of a medieval battle which shaped 
their destiny” (Emmert 1990: 142) 

 
                                                 
207 The following quotations are all taken from the broadly scholarly genre of writings which, whether academic or 
more popular, claim a basic factual accuracy and adherence to a methodology. This for the moment excludes 
journalistic, poetic, and overtly propagandistic texts, which will be taken up later on. 

 

225

II 

 

 

“The Kosovo mythology operates as an alternative field of logic, history, and reality. In this 
alternate reality, the configurations of hate stereotypes ... make sense. ... At some point ... Kosovo 
mythology became so strong that those who tried to manipulate it ... found themselves slaves to 
the expectations and interior logic of this ideology of eternal conflict unto extermination.” (Sells 
2002: 67) 
 
“The crux of the grand narrative ... is the way in which present-day Albanians, or alternatively 
Bosnian Muslims, are looked upon as ‘Turk-surrogates’, that is, as symbolic stand-ins for the real 
Turks (Ottomans) who defeated (Serb) Prince Lazar 600 years ago in 1389 at the Battle of 
Kosovo.” (Vetlesen 2005: 179) 
 
“The loss of power was particularly traumatic for the Serbs. ... The myths dealing with the loss of 
the medieval empire served to create a nationalist frenzy at the moment when ... a unique 
opportunity [seemed to be provided] for the realization of the central promise of Serbian national 
mythology, the creation of the Second Serbian Empire.” (Anzulović 1999: 2)  

“Serbs began to feel the defeat in Kosovo as if it had occurred only yesterday. ... Based on the 
past trauma and time collapse, Serbs perceived a threat when one did not actually exist and felt 
compelled to act against it. Thus the collective idea that Muslims had to be exterminated slowly 
began to develop.” (Volkan 2002: 93, 96) 

The first group of statements view Serbs as a nation decisively defined by the traumatic 

but ennobling memory of the Battle of Kosovo. It is believed that the “Kosovo pledge” – the 
choice of the “heavenly kingdom” and the self-effacing heroism of Serbian fighters – which 
Serbs have adhered to throughout the centuries, makes them a better kind of people, brave and 
virtuous, unassuming but tenacious, profoundly spiritual. This account will be called celebratory 
discourse. 

The second group represents a view that is in many respects the polar opposite of the 
first. It is highly critical of Serbs and denies them any and all of such beautiful qualities. They 
are depicted as a power-hungry nation prone to aggression against others, especially their weaker 
neighbors. In these destructive actions Serbs are propelled by a pernicious myth in whose grips 
they are hopelessly caught, losing any rational sense of reality. This is denouncing discourse. 

The former discourse tends to be an insider one, set forth by Serbs, especially those who 
readily self-identify as such, while the latter is generally an outsider discourse, put forward from 
without by non-Serb observers and commentators. This preferential association between the 
content and the speaker’s location is of course not absolute,208 but it is both quantitatively and 
symbolically preponderant. 

Opposed as they are, the two discourses share more than would be expected. Their 

Ontologization of Trauma. First, they both believe that the mythicized collective 

common ground is marked by three basic assumptions. 
 
remembrance of the Battle of Kosovo is indelibly imprinted on the Serbian mind. On both sides 
the Kosovo Myth is construed as trauma, as the Serbian Trauma. Whether this is extolled or 
                                                 
208 There are also denouncing insiders and an occasional celebrating outsider. Critically minded insiders (e.g. Popov 
2000; Čolović 2001, 2002), while concurring in many respects with the denouncing outsiders, are free from gross 
oversimplifications and factual errors that abound in the latter’s works. As for the sympathetic outsiders, it is worth 
noting that a rare example of this kind (Emmert 1990) was written well before the outbreak of Yugoslav wars.  

 

226

Exoticization of Serbs. In both discourses, Serbs are essentialized into a special kind of 

denigrated, it is taken as a fact that Serbs have mourned the Kosovo defeat for centuries.209 
Furthermore, this thing, the Kosovo Trauma, not just passively exists but is an active factor in 
shaping Serbs’ actions. As a result, it produces consequences in reality and affects also the lives 
the lives of others – whether they are seen as targets of Serbian aggression (version II) or 
beneficiaries of Serbian chivalrous idealism (version I).  
 
people, a race apart. The incorporation of the Kosovo Trauma makes them different from 
anybody else, producing their radical alterity. Unlike other nations, Serbs glorify death and 
celebrate defeat. The pain of the Trauma and the thirst for revenge turns them into savage 
aggressors(II)/ self-sacrificing heroes(I) in their constant conflicts with various enemies. Due to 
the Trauma, they have remained immune to the ills(I)/ benefits(II) of Western modernity. Serbs 
are irrational, inscrutable and unpredictable, controlled by mysterious emotional forces working 
from within them. They are the Savage – whether Noble or Ignoble. 
 
and perceives the nation as a homogeneous body. It is “Serbs” who feel, remember, believe, 
think, sing, or imagine. There is no mention of disagreement or multiplicity of voices. 
Denouncers almost never speak of internal differences in opinion among “Serbs” concerning the 
Kosovo legacy, its interpretation or use. For the celebrators, the invocations of “every Serb” and 
“all Serbs” is a central element of their very discursive stance, which importantly depends on 
magically obliterating dissent and heterogeneity within. 

Homogenization of Serbs. The third assumption stems logically from the preceding two, 

Beside such internal similarities, the two arguments share one more feature: they are both 

currently hegemonic in their respective areas of influence. The interest in the Kosovo Myth 
received a strong impetus with the outbreak of wars in former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s. The 
widespread perception of Serbs as the main culprits for Yugoslavia’s bloody collapse and chief 
perpetrators of atrocities prompted many too look for causes of such behavior in the Serbian 
cultural past, and to find a pivotal point in the Kosovo Myth. An unbroken line was established 
extending from late 14th century through 19th-century Serbian nationalism to the present day. It 
was postulated that the traumatic memory of the Kosovo failure which Serbs were never able to 
overcome, this unhealed wound, spurred them to aggression, expansionism, trampling on others’ 
rights and, finally, genocide.  

Over the past fifteen or so years in the international public opinion, including the 

scholarly one, Serbs have become rather firmly entrenched as the example of a nation going 
amok. They have been likened to the Holocaust perpetrators, an association which is not just an 
ordinary political slander but a ritual pollution, and thus cannot be shed by rational 
demonstrations of innocence (Alexander 2004b: 244).210 This is the background that determines 
current international receptions of the Kosovo symbolism. The latter is used, almost self-
evidently by now, as an explanatory tool. In a recent book about the notion of genocide (Vetlesen 
2005), Serbs are the central example, and the Kosovo Myth is matter-of-factly referred to as a 
major trigger of their genocidal actions. For the psychiatrist Vamik Volkan (1996, 2001, 2002) 
Serbs and their Kosovo legacy proved particularly instrumental in building the theory of “chosen 
                                                 
209 True, quite a few denouncers dispute the historical record of the Battle, or otherwise point at the spuriousness of 
the Trauma, as something that Serbs have made up rather than experienced. Yet this is still ontologization insofar as 
Serbs are held to believe in this fabrication and act upon it. 
210 See also Alexander 2004b: 246-249 for a discussion of the analogy between the Holocaust and Serbs’ conduct in 
the 1990s wars. 

 

227

trauma”.211 Šuber (2006) flatly declares Serbia is an “imperative subject” for studying 
interrelatedness of myth and politics, and singles out the Kosovo myth as the factor conditioning 
Serbian behavior lately. Michael Billig, in his otherwise thoroughly original book (Billig 1995), 
looks for the sharpest possible contrast with the bland, “banal” nationalism of the Western 
democracies and finds it in, whom else, Serbs.212 Countless more examples could be cited, but 
the point is that the Kosovo Myth is presented in a misleadingly univocal manner, as conveying 
invariably a single message over many centuries: a message of unyielding collectivism, 
adoration of war and death, aggressive militarism, and particularistic anti-humanism.  
 
Yet it has been curiously overlooked how much this account, minus the negative moral 
judgment, agrees with the most uncritical and self-congratulatory internal Serbian view of the 
Kosovo tradition. Western disparaging accounts portray Serbs in precisely the way the 
staunchest Serbian nationalists prefer to see their nation. Seen from this angle, the two sides 
cooperate closely. They work together in a formidable joint effort to constrain the Serbian 
identity to a single symbolic structure – the “Kosovo Myth” – and a particular version of it at 
that. Although they are usually articulated as a hostile response to, and in order to undercut the 
claims of, one another, even this apparent opposition contributes to their objective cooperation. I 
will return to this. 

In the analysis that follows, the twin accounts presented above will be used as a foil 

against which to test new openings. I will take a closer look at how they were constructed and 
how they are still being constructed. All three shared assumptions will be challenged. To begin 
with, I will seek to de-ontologize the Kosovo Trauma, or to de-traumaticize Kosovo symbolism. 
The traumaticness of Kosovo for Serbs is not a fact but a social process, an “ongoing practical 
accomplishment” as Garfinkel would put it, which can be traced and described. Secondly, as for 
essentialization, I am convinced that Serbs are not so much different from other nations as they 
would sometimes like to think of themselves or as they are frequently portrayed by outsiders; 
and that for analyzing things Serbian the usual instruments of the social sciences will perfectly 
do.213 Thirdly, it will be shown how homogenization is harnessed to the political usability of 
Kosovo symbolism in the internal political arena for purposes of exclusion, undermining the 
development of genuine pluralism.  

It is my intention to explore the strategically important ambiguities, gaps, loops, nesting 

implications, loose ends, double-entendres, misunderstandings better left unclarified etc. It is 
such discursive plays which, I believe, are mainly responsible for the Myth’s enduring power, 
especially a continuous shifting along the axis of universality vs. particularity.  

I hope to show this to be an excellent example of how cultural structures operate within 

the dynamically unfolding historical contexts, in constant tension between the autonomous 
strength or “semiotic resistance” of sedimented and patterned cultural meanings, on one hand, 
and the contingencies of political, economic, and military circumstances, on the other. Cultural 
structures, though flexible and open-ended enough to remain meaningful over for so long and 
                                                 
211 Neither Volkan nor Vetlesen are Balkans specialists, but this does not seem to be a hindrance. 
212 “[S]urely, there is a distinction between the flag waved by Serbian ethnic cleansers and that hanging 
unobtrusively outside the US post office” (1995: 6). It will be a concern of this chapter to show that the Kosovo 
Myth can serve, and has served, not only the purposes of “hot nationalism” but of the “banal” one as well – 
underpinning, one might say, “the flag hanging unobtrusively outside the Serbian post office”. 
213 The assumption that Serbs are profoundly different may lead to the kind of intellectual abdication van de Port 
(1999) openly advocates in proclaiming that “it takes a Serb to know a Serb”, an idea which he claims to have 
arrived at by “taking seriously what Serbs tell about themselves”. Here the Serbian radical-alterity- posturing 
happily coincides with an outsider’s postmodernist destruction of social science. 

 

228

through so diverse situations, have also been resistant enough not to allow for just any use that 
someone might wish to put them to. These structures have displayed an ability to channel 
interpretations into some directions at the expense of others, restricting the range of the possible. 
On the other hand, cultural structures cannot operate in a vacuum producing, like a machine, 
always the same pre-packed hermeneutic output. Finally, they do not operate by themselves but 
require living, thinking, acting and, especially, speaking agents.214 Kosovo has become the main 
Serbian “entrenched story” (Živković 2001a: xii) – the community’s most powerful 
communication resource because, having been told and retold in thousands of times and ways, 
has acquired a unique intertextual thickness.215  

My theoretical terrain can be delineated by juxtaposing the Dragnich-Todorovich 

sentence quoted above – “Kosovo is many diverse things to different living Serbs, but they all 
have it in their blood“ – and a seemingly similar one used by Eyerman (2002: 18) to characterize 
the role of slavery in the forging of African American identity: “Slavery has meant different 
things for different generations of black Americans, but it was always there as a referent“ (italics 
added). It is in the space between blood and referent that I wish to move, from the former to the 
latter. A referent is something you can follow and describe how, where, when and by whom it 
has been referred to; and in this way, you may hope to re-trace in the reverse direction the 
passage it covered in turning into the alleged blood.216 

Two reservations are in order here. First, I will only deal with Kosovo as a Serbian 

symbolic referent. Albanians, who make up the overwhelming majority of inhabitants of Kosovo 
as a real territory and newly independent Balkan country seeking full international recognition, 
also feel Kosovo to be “more than” just a piece of land.  For them too, Kosovo has sacred 
attributes and this sacralization is similarly based on suffering and heroism. Though it would be 
fascinating to examine the parallels between Albanian and Serbian constructions of Kosovo as 
traumatic, this must remain beyond the scope of this chapter.217 Second, when referring to 
“Kosovo”, I will mean the symbolic, abstract meaning, not Kosovo as a real place, unless I 
specifically indicate so. I will not deal with the more directly political, legal or security issues 
involved in the Kosovo crisis since the late 1980s. The abstract and the concrete cannot of course 
be completely disentangled, all the more so because Kosovo as territory has been the bone of 
contention over which Serbs and Albanians have vied for the last one hundred and fifty years. 
For Serbs, Kosovo is a sacred symbol not only because of the Battle but also for the presence on 
the soil of real Kosovo of precious cultural monuments, most notably medieval churches and 
monasteries. Thus when Serbs claim Kosovo is the “cradle of Serbhood”, they ambiguously refer 
                                                 
214 While bewaring the mythification of the Myth itself, its purely instrumentalist alternative is no better. Thus 
Malcolm (1998: 80) writes that “[t]here is simply no evidence to suggest that any Serb ever drew the idea of a 
special ‘Kosovo covenant’ ... before the nineteenth century” and, in response to a Serbian author who called Kosovo 
tradition the “permanent connective tissue among Serbs”, continues: “‘Permanent’ is perhaps not the most obvious 
choice of word for such a very recent product of nationalist ideological history”. A cultural sociology cannot afford 
to deal so dismissively with meaning-structures. 
215 “Entrenched story” is a narrative a community comes to be stuck with, which “becomes ever more entrenched 
even as it is bitterly contested, for any new reference only serves to make it associatively richer”. Its elasticity in 
interpretative and pragmatic terms is due to the fact that its elements “trail behind them a long history of previous 
uses” (Živković 2001a: xii-xiii) 
216 Dragnich and Todorovich’s blood is not the only one, cf.: “Deeply rooted in the mind of the people, the Kosovo 
tradition is still torturing Serbian blood” (Djordjević 1991: 324 – interestingly, another Serbian American 
academic). 
217 For hints, see Vickers 1998; Luci and Marković 2008; Zdravković 2005; Duijzings 2000. On recent 
symbolizations of Kosovo Albanian victimhood see Di Lellio and Schwandner-Sievers 2006. 

 

229

to both the embodied place and the sacred idea, and the dynamic between an abstracting, de-
territorializing symbolization and recurrent re-territorialization of “Kosovo” has been quite 
important in the cultural history of the notion.218 However, Kosovo as a contemporary political 
issue is far too complex to be dealt with summarily.  

My argument will proceed in four steps. To begin, I will trace how the apparently unitary 

Myth, its form finalized in the early 19th century, operated within a number of vastly different 
ideological-political programs in modern Serbian and Yugoslav history. Next, I will try to tease 
out the Myth’s strategic ambivalences and the ways in which it is continuously discursively 
reproduced in specific instances. A discussion of the official and vernacular interpretations in the 
most recent period will follow, to conclude with some general implications.  
 
 
Cultural structures and their contexts: the shaping of the Myth 
 
1. The beginnings: 14-18th centuries  
The Kosovo legend was spun over several centuries from elements originating in three kinds of 
sources, one oral and two written. The epic folk poetry about the Battle of Kosovo had been 
preserved and transmitted until 19th c. as a living oral tradition, at first chivalric and feudal in 
literary form and social location, to become more rural, popular and patriarchal with the 
disappearance of the native Serbian elite.219 The two kinds of written sources involve religious 
writings (sermons, eulogies, hagiographies), and secular works (travelogues, biographies, 
chronicles). In a fine example of what nowadays would be called intertextuality, the various 
sources intermingled and borrowed from each other, motifs and elements flowing from one to 
the other in different directions. To try to set apart the “factual” and the “imaginary” within the 
Kosovo symbolism is difficult and, moreover, unproductive, because it is only in their 
conjunction that the two levels represent an active cultural structure.  

What would become known as the Battle of Kosovo220 took place on a field near present-
day Pristina, on June 15, 1389, between the army led by the Serbian prince Lazar Hrebeljanović 
and the Ottoman forces led by the Sultan Murad. At that time, Lazar was just beginning to meet 
some success in his attempts to stabilize the fragmented and mutually quarrelling Serbian lands 
and to bid the position of the sovereign. Previously, the Serbian medieval state had gone through 
almost two centuries of progress and expansion under the Nemanjić dynasty, reaching its apogee 
under Stefan Dušan, crowned emperor in 1346. The decline was soon to follow however, and the 
last Nemanjić, Dušan’s son Uroš, died in 1371. In the same year, the advancing Ottomans 
marked their first important victory against the Serbs. 
                                                 
218 In terms of  O’Brien’s (1987: 9-13) theory of “holy nations”, distinguishing the Old Testament version (concrete 
and localized) from the New Testament version (spiritual and other-worldly), the Serbian case oscillates between the 
two. It began as the latter and slid into the former in 19th -turn of 20th century, yet occasionally reverting to the “New 
Testament” variety in calmer periods, while the last three decades have seen a powerful revival of the “Old 
Testament” kind.  
219 The oldest and first recorded folk epics were 14- or 16-syllabic bugarštice, but what would become canonical is 
the decasyllabic type (deseterac), usually sung with the accompaniment of gusle (a simple string instrument played 
with a bow). In spite of their aura of the only genuine representative of the folk tradition about Kosovo, poems of the 
latter kind were composed no earlier than mid-18th century (Emmert 1990: 122; Loma 2002: 130). Other, less 
consequential genres of folklore on Kosovo themes – tales, proverbs, toponyms and popular genealogies – also exist. 
220 See Emmert (1990) for a detailed account of the historical event and the legend. 

 

230

Like all medieval battles, Kosovo was, strictly speaking, not fought by “Serbs” and 

“Turks” in national or ethnic terms, although it was redefined as such in retrospect. Its religious 
component was important though: it was felt on both sides to be a clash between Christians and 
Muslims. The Battle’s immediate outcome is not clear,221 but with the passage of time it was 
increasingly presented as Serbian and Christian defeat, on which basis the Kosovo Myth would 
be built. This was a retrospective interpretation of a military event which, however undecided 
initially, represented an important step in the loss of Serbia’s statehood and independence to the 
Ottomans.222 Although Serbian lands retained a degree of autonomy until 1459, and actually 
experienced some cultural flourishing, Lazar’s widow was forced to accept vassalage to Turks 
and other feudal lords were under mounting Ottoman pressure.223  
 
Whether Kosovo was “really” Serbian military defeat or not is actually not crucial. The 
cultural construction of Trauma congealed around the factual core of a battle and death of the 
ruler. The social context was favorable for a traumatic definition of the event. Under Ottoman 
rule, the previously initiated economic, political and cultural development was cut short. Social 
structure changed: native nobility disappeared, previous political institutions were dissolved, 
Serbian Church lost its privileged role, a new ruling group of a different faith was introduced. 
Serbs’ ties to Western Europe were severed. The population homogenized into peasantry 
underwent what ethnologists have called “secondary patriarchalization” - reverting to ancient, 
often pre-Christian forms of social organization, economy and morality. Although one would do 
well not to perpetuate Serbian textbook stereotypes on the “five hundreds of Turkish yoke”, a 
frozen time of utter darkness and misfortune, there are enough grounds to argue that for Serbs 
the Ottoman conquest meant a rupture, a sudden redirection of historical course. The Kosovo 
legend emerged as part of the collective effort to make sense of this rupture and a retrospective 
explanation of its roots and causes. 

 The legend would take its final shape only in 18th century.224 In this long first period, 
several types of carrier groups may be identified that were articulating, recording, interpreting 
and spreading what would become the Serbian Trauma of Kosovo. At the very beginning of the 
process stood the mutually overlapping circles of Serbian aristocracy and the Orthodox Church, 
who first established the cult of Prince Lazar. Later carriers of the tale were innumerable 
anonymous folk singers who were telling and retelling the story of Kosovo heroes in their 
creations/performances.225 They did not necessarily intend to transmit Trauma: their main 
concern was to tell a good story well, to entertain their audiences and at once provide them with 
a morally uplifting lesson of warrior virtues, in accordance with the patriarchal ethos. Further, 
there were Catholic travelers, monks, educators and emissaries, from the Balkans or Western 
Europe, who often found it in their own interest to spread the Myth. And finally, often left out of 
                                                 
221 The earliest sources, both Serbian and Turkish, either just describe a bloody battle in which both commanders 
died, or call it a Christian victory. 
222 The possibility of a Serbian victory is actually irrelevant because the idea of Kosovo as defeat, tragedy, and 
drama “is so deeply engraved in the consciousness of both ordinary people and professional historians that it has 
become ... part of our thinking and values we have adopted” (Blagojević 1990: 14-5). 
223 Ottoman rule in central Serbia would last until early 19th century, and in Kosovo until 1912. 
224 This final shape, which we know today, appeared for the first time in two compilations originating at two remote 
points in the Serb-populated territories, both of them outside of Serbia proper: epic drama The Battle of Kosovo was 
created in the Bay of Kotor (present-day Montenegro); and the prose work The Tale about the Battle of Kosovo in 
the Austrian province of Srem (present-day Vojvodina, across the river Sava from central Serbia) (Emmert 1990: 
123; Popović 1998: 60-68). The authorship and mutual influences of the two works remain moot. 
225 On the specific logic of epic singing, and the notions of formulae, creativity and originality in this context, see 
the superb study of Albert Lord (1964). 

 

231

conventional accounts in spite of their importance, were the Serbian educated middle classes in 
the border regions of the Habsburg Empire, arising since the late 17th century after successive 
waves of Serb migration from Ottoman-held territories. As to the specification of the “nature of 
the victim”, it was not quite clear who they were, and hence should feel “interpellated” by the 
traumatic narrative – Serbs, Orthodox Serbs, Christians?, nor did it have to be made clear, given 
the cultural assumptions of the times. This initial ambivalence would prove useful in later stages. 

Elements of the legend. The legend is organized around two foci, personified in two 

towering figures: Prince Lazar and Miloš Obilić. One focus is religious, Christian, and martyrial, 
and the other epic and heroic.226 They are complemented by the “traitor” Vuk Branković. There 
is a host of accompanying characters – the knight Jug Bogdan and his nine sons, the Jugović 
brothers, all killed in the battle; their mother, who died of sorrow; the Maiden of Kosovo, a girl 
who lost her fiance; as well as an array of lesser knights and nobles. Almost all of them are 
fictitious, but very much alive in the conventional reception of the myth.227  

Prince Lazar. The cult of Prince Lazar was the embryo of the emerging Kosovo myth. 

Proclaimed a saint shortly after the Battle, from 1390 on Lazar was celebrated every June 15 
along with the Prophet Amos (the saint to whom the day is dedicated in the liturgical calendar), 
with a special Office to the Saint Prince Lazar composed to that purpose. While several members 
of the Nemanjić dynasty had been proclaimed saints, these earlier saintly rulers were celebrated 
for having lived in deep devotion to the Christian faith, and not for dying for it (Popović 1998: 
23-4). Lazar was the first to be commemorated both as a believer and a martyr, who through 
deliberately embracing death earned the entrance to eternal life.   

Lazar’s martyrdom is based on the fact that he gave his life “in defense of the holy 

cross”. The early religious writings are responsible for presenting Lazar’s death as the result of a 
choice on his part: he consciously opted to die in order to redeem himself, his people and his 
faith. By modeling Lazar’s character closely on the figure of Jesus Christ, the church writings 
also introduced the theme of reversal of the Battle’s outcome. What was a defeat in this-worldly 
terms becomes a triumph on a higher, spiritual level; what looked like a terrible loss is recoded 
as willing self-sacrifice in order to attain eternal, spiritual and therefore, in devout Christian eyes, 
the only true victory. In a medieval eulogy, Lazar is described as addressing his knights on the 
eve of the battle, calling them into an honorable death as the price for salvation.228 The phrases 
employed belong to the rhetoric of the period, and the worldview they express is also 
recognizably medieval. We do not know if Lazar really said this to his soldiers; but even if he 
did, it would not make him very different from countless Christian warriors of the period.229 
The folk tradition elaborated this symbolic baseline laid out by the Church, placing 

Lazar’s martyrdom in a compelling narrative which it fleshed out with many details. On the eve 
                                                 
226 Some commentators add also: pagan (Loma, 2002; Popović, 1998). 
227 It can hardly be said that they live on just in the “popular” understanding, since in every Serbian city and town 
there are streets bearing the names of these characters, which makes them quite “official”. 
228 “If the sword, if wounds, or if the darkness of death comes to us, we accept it sweetly for Christ and for the 
godliness of our homeland. It is better to die in battle than to live in shame. Better it is for us to accept death from 
the sword in battle than to offer our shoulders to the enemy. We have lived a long time for the world; in the end we 
seek to accept the martyr’s struggle and to live forever in the heaven.” And his soldiers respond: “We die so that we 
may live forever” (Patriarch Danilo, “Narrative about Prince Lazar”, quoted in Emmert 1990: 63, 64). 
229 And not just Christian, for that matter: Ottoman sources glorify the Sultan in almost identical terms, Islamic 
version, as a martyr for the faith. How the Battle of Kosovo was portrayed at both sides of the battlefield as a 
“cosmic” battle and a pledge for eternal glory and salvation, is discussed in Bakić-Hayden 2004: 35-38; Emmert 
1990: 88-98; Popović 1998: 24-30. 

 

232

of the battle, the poem says, Lazar received a message from the Holy Virgin, transmitted by St. 
Elijah in the guise of a falcon, to choose between an earthly kingdom, that would bring him 
victory and the battle, and a heavenly one, for which he would have to die together with all of his 
men. Lazar chooses the latter, erects, as ordered, a church on the Kosovo Field, takes holy 
communion with his soldiers, and marches to death. This – Lazar’s choice of death as 
redemption – would become known as the “Kosovo covenant” or “Kosovo pledge”. The parallel 
between Lazar and Christ is particularly accentuated in the tale of the “Prince’s Supper”, which 
is only found in the folk tradition and is modeled as a replica of the Last Supper. 

When the early Christian sources talk of Lazar’s victory rather than defeat, it is always 

described in terms of “light”, which indicates the notion’s otherworldly, spiritual meaning. 
Besides, popular lore includes legends about his miraculous body. Lazar is here identified as the 
embodied symbol of the community, of Serbs’ “corporate identity” (Bakić-Hayden 2004: 39) 
which, in the centuries after the battle, was under pressure to survive both in a physical sense and 
in the sense of preserving their religiously based communal identity.230 The influence of 
medieval notions of the “king’s two bodies” (Kantorowicz 1957) is obvious, where the spiritual 
body of the leader is joined with the corpus of his knights, or “the whole people”, in a sacralized 
sacrifice for the eternal life of the community and the Christian faith (Bojović 1991).231  

Miloš Obilić is a brave soldier and Lazar’s son-in-law who at the supper before the 
Battle was unjustly accused of imminent treason. Faced with Lazar’s mistrust, he decided to 
prove his loyalty by killing Murad. The next day during the fighting he went on his own to the 
Turkish camp, entered by pretending to be a deserter, and killed the Sultan, only to be killed 
himself. 

Miloš Obilić is not a historical personality. How, where and when he appeared as a 
fictional character is still debated. Some scholars (Popović 1998: 29-42) suggest that Miloš 
originated in the Turkish sources, invented by Ottoman writers in order to cover and justify the 
embarrassing fact of Sultan’s death; Serbs then took over this character of villain-assassin and 
turned him into a hero. Yet others (e.g. Loma 2002) argue that Serbian sources too knew of a 
knight who killed Murad,232 but that everything else, including his name, was legendary. 
Whenever Serbs’ relations with the Turkish authorities worsened, as in rebellions and wars, 
Miloš’s figure became salient, and finally topped all others on the eve of the First Serbian 
Uprising of 1804.  

Furthermore, Catholic Slavs of the Western Balkans played a role in the shaping and 

spreading of the cult of Miloš. The neighboring Catholic states, exposed to the threat of Turkish 
invasion, were promoting anti-Ottoman and anti-Muslim sentiments, to which purpose the figure 
of Miloš was ideally suited (Popović 1998: 43-70). In addition, after 15th century considerable 
numbers of Serbs fleeing from Serbia settled in the border regions, employed as frontier soldiers 
of Austria and Venice. They lived in a highly patriarchal and militarized cultural milieu, where 
the epic tradition was thriving. Miloš, the most epic of all Kosovo heroes, was thus prominent 
                                                 
230 “[Lazar’s] body incorporates the nation itself, his head the spirit of the people. Miraculously... neither rotted for 
forty years, just as the Serbian people have not ‘decayed’ into the customs and faith of their Islamic rulers” (Bakić-
Hayden 2004: 39). 
231 Although in the Middle Ages, writes Kantorowicz (1957: 261) every soldier giving his life for the community 
becomes a martyr in the image of Christ, the king’s death holds a special significance: “The sacrifice of the Prince 
for his corpus mysticum – the secular state – compared with the sacrifice of Christ more directly ...: both offered 
their lives not only as members but also as the heads of their mystical bodies.”  
232 Military historians argue that the feat was more probably accomplished by an armored unit. Capturing or killing 
the enemy chief commander was a major element of medieval war tactics (Blagojević 1989: 20). 

 

233

among both Catholics and the Orthodox in the Western Balkans. Finally, a major source of the 
narrative substance of the Kosovo myth, from which oral tradition subsequently borrowed, was 
the semi-legendary history of Slavic peoples (Il Regno degli Slavi, 1601) by Mavro Orbin, a 
monk from the Republic of Dubrovnik. It is in Orbin’s work that the complete story of Miloš and 
his exploit was rendered for the first time.  

Nowadays, Miloš is undoubtedly the central character of the Kosovo Myth. Although he 
never existed, most Serbs are convinced he did. His name is metaphorical shorthand for selfless 
heroism and fearlessness; the saying, “to have the heart of Obilić” means honorable courage and 
ability to withstand the greatest challenge. His figure is in present times the epitome of 
Serbhood, especially of its militant, warrior variant. It is a curious paradox then that this very 
personification of Serbianness should be a literary figure which among all the Kosovo characters 
was most directly derived from Serbs’ political and cultural exchange with others – and those 
others most often seen as Serbs’ enemies, that is, Muslim Turks and Catholic Croats and 
Slovenes.  

Vuk Branković illustrates yet third possibility of the relation between “fact” and 

None of this helped him to escape his literary fate. It is as if the narrative of heroic 

“fiction”: he really existed, but was not at all what the legend tells of him. In the story, he is the 
traitor who, having first slandered Miloš to Lazar to divert the latter’s attention from his own evil 
designs, betrayed Lazar, gave up fighting in Kosovo and went over to the Turks. Historically, 
Vuk Branković was the second greatest Serbian feudal lord, Lazar’s son in law and master of the 
very land where the Battle was fought. He was not a traitor at all but, on the contrary, continued 
resisting the Ottomans even after Lazar’s family agreed to surrender. He died in Turkish prison.  
 
martyrdom of Lazar and his knights could not do without a traitor: such a figure was demanded, 
one might say, by the constraints of the genre. How Vuk Branković got into the role in the first 
place is not entirely clear,233 but probably has to do with the fact that he refused to obey the 
Lazarević family and follow their political line. The enmity between the two families continued 
for some time after the Battle and it was at the Lazarević court that the first allusions to Vuk’s 
disloyalty were produced (Ljubinković 1989: 150-152; Mihaljčić 1990, Emmert 1990: 105-120). 
And once the motif of treason got into the legend, it could not leave it, because it was nurtured 
both by instrumental factors of political interests and by cultural factors of narrative coherence 
and familiarity. If Lazar was Jesus Christ, someone had to be Judas. The Biblical cliche of the 
“Judas motif” was found in many Christian legends, especially in the Middle Ages (Mihaljčić 
1990: 29). And for the more heroic, epic reading of the legend, if two characters were positive, 
the story would lack sufficient dramatic intensity and thus would be implausible without a 
negative one. Both virtue and vice must have a face in order to be sufficiently alive for the 
vernacular cultural consumer.  

As could be seen, all the early formative drives that helped shape the Kosovo Myth were 

not specifically Serbian but rather partook of the cultural dynamics of the times. Christian 
hagiography, which served as the first discursive form to establish the cult of Prince Lazar, was a 
major genre of medieval literature; and the practice of canonizing and religiously celebrating 
political leaders, preserving and displaying their holy relics were all common in European 
Christendom (see also Ćirković 1990: 112). Further, the Kosovo folk poems belong to the genre 
of heroic epic widespread in Europe of the early Middle Ages – the only difference being that 
Serbs, due to “secondary patriarchalization”, continued singing them long after the Western 
                                                 
233 The first attested source that names him as the traitor is Orbin’s History. We do not know, and never will, if the 
unrecorded oral tradition preceding Orbin cast Vuk Branković in that role or not. 

 

234

counterparts sank into oblivion. Even specific motifs are shared: the slandered knight, accused 
by his master of betrayal, who decides to prove his allegiance by a great deed, is found also in 
the legends of Roland or Tristan and Isolde (Ljubinković 1989: 154; Loma, 2002). Hence from 
the very beginning the Kosovo legend was a way of Serbs’ participation in the cultural traffic 
with the rest of the world rather than a path leading to isolation and exclusivity.    
 
2. Serbian modernity: 19th century 

The dominant twin accounts presented at the beginning of this chapter cast the Kosovo 

Myth as the prime sign of Serbs’ irreparable pre-modernity and anti-modernity. Nevertheless, the 
Myth as we know it was formed only in the 19th century, at the time when Serbia was struggling 
to get (back) into the history of European nations. And this was necessarily a modern struggle, 
which made use of modern ideas and modern ways of pursuing them.  

The Kosovo legacy lived into the late 18th century as a collection of interrelated and 

symbolically relatively coherent bits and pieces. In Bakić-Hayden’s (2004: 31) apt phrase, it was 
the First Serbian Uprising that “tied into the knot of collective awareness many loose strands of a 
long epic memory”. In the decades immediately preceding the 1804 Uprising the cult of Kosovo 
was more widely spread and alive than ever before. As previously noted, its main centers were 
not in Serbia proper (which of course is not to say it was unknown there) but in the Montenegrin 
highlands, and among Serbs in the Habsburg Empire, whose entrepreneurial middle classes were 
the only modern, educated stratum of Serbs at the time. They were crucial inspirers of the Myth’s 
first direct political use. And in spite of their modernity, they preserved the epic singing tradition 
they had brought with them on their migrations, so it was in Srem that some of the key folk 
poems about Kosovo were written down at the turn of the 19th century (1998: 147-150).234 

The beginning of 19th century was decisive for both the Serbian nation and the Kosovo 
Myth. Politically, modern Serbia took its first steps, through the First (1804-1813) and Second 
(1815) uprisings against Ottoman rule, in a long process of acquiring independence that would 
be finished only in 1878. Culturally – which in this case means also politically – the crucial 
move in articulating and fixing the oral folk tradition was made by the ethnographer and 
language reformer Vuk Karadžić. He wrote down, compiled and published Serbian folk poems, 
dividing them into several “cycles”, the central one being “the Kosovo cycle”.235 And, 
intentionally or not, “Vuk’s work posited the Kosovo tradition as being the heart of his people’s 
life, perceiving it, in the light of the current Western and Central European Zeitgeist, as a living 
expression of their ‘national spirit’” (Bakić-Hayden 2004: 31). From the very beginning, the 
nation-builders felt that the Kosovo legacy can be used for political mobilization for the purposes 
at hand. “By the late 18th century as the spirit of revolution found an echo in the Balkans, Serbs 
were ready to utilize the powerful psychological factor of Kosovo in the struggle for liberation 
and unification” (Emmert 1990: 123). The Kosovo story had all the features Smith (1997: 56-59) 
lists as criteria for a “usable past”, i.e. one that can help form nations: “authenticity”, inspiration, 
and capacity for reinterpretation. The Kosovo theme was used already in the preparations for the 
rebellion.236 At the outbreak of the Uprising, the leader himself, Karadjordje – who would be 
                                                 
234 It is sociologically extremely interesting that a few of these key poems were at least to a degree the authorial 
creations of specific individuals, the well-known singers of the time who told them to Karadžić. It was only after 
being published that they were canonized as the stereotypical “expression of the anonymous folk genius”.  
235 Himself a participant in the First Uprising, after its defeat he was forced to flee to Austria. His first collection of 
Serbian folk poems was published in Vienna in 1814, and several more followed. 
236 At a secret meeting an insurgent priest reportedly said: „Brothers! It has been so many hundreds of years since all 
our glory was buried in the dark and for all of us sad tomb at Kosovo...“ (quoted in Antonijević 2007a: 135). 

 

235

remembered as the „avenger of Kosovo“ – is said to have called „every Serb to arms, so that we 
may take revenge on the Turks, and in the name of God cast off the yoke that the Serb has 
carried since Kosovo to this day“ (quoted in Antonijević 2007a: 142). The epic tradition could be 
used to perceive and understand new situations and new tasks through the familiar images and 
concepts, and thus to collectively appropriate them more easily (Bakić-Hayden 2004: 36)  
While Obilić’s heroism and Lazar’s sacrifice could incite peasant masses to join the 

struggle that was at once a war of independence and a social revolution, the folklore collected by 
Vuk Karadžić was an invaluable political asset in winning outside support for the national 
cause.237 This was the time of the romanticist craze for “authentic” folk culture, and Serbian 
poems were warmly received and praised by some of the great intellectual figures of the day. 
Karadžić understood it very well that his undertaking is not just cultural but rather a national-
political one, since the admiration for Serbian culture in the powerful Western Europe would 
help secure a more favorable stance towards Serbian political aspirations, and on the other hand, 
the proof of “antiquity” of national traditions would support Serbian claims to nationhood. 
Serbian leaders felt what the spirit of the times was, and spoke its language. It is one of the many 
paradoxes around the Kosovo Myth, nowadays used to mark the radical alterity of Serbs, that its 
final form was fruit of the Serbian desire to construct a modern national culture that will be part 
of the Western world (cf. Bakić-Hayden 2004: 32). 

Around the middle of the century, as Serbia was gradually winning more sovereignty and 

building a new nation-state, some other important events took place. The adoption of Vuk 
Karadžić’s reformed orthography and grammar supplied Serbs with a standard language they had 
never had. The Montenegrin poet-ruler Petar Petrović Njegoš published his epic poem Mountain 
Wreath which, though written by an individual, in its poetics and its ethics followed closely the 
world of the patriarchal folk poetry, and did for the popularization of the Kosovo themes more 
than any other work. In Serbia, new, bourgeois strata were slowly emerging. The state 
encouraged and supported education abroad, and at home as well public education was 
established in order to raise the abysmally low literacy rate. The Karadžić collections of folk 
songs immediately became part of the curriculum, and the importance of the educational system 
in inculcating the Kosovo legacy in subsequent generations can hardly be overestimated. 

The ideas of European liberal and national revolutions of 1848 resonated strongly among 

Serbian youth, especially students, both in Serbia proper and in the Habsburg lands. One of the 
offshoots was literary romanticism of the 1850s and 1860s. This cultural-political movement was 
particularly passionate in reviving the Kosovo Myth, centered, in their understanding, on 
heroism and self-sacrifice for the nation. Student societies, clubs and associations idolized the 
Kosovo heroes and emulated the folk singer in the poetry they themselves wrote.238  

In light of the current easy identifications of the Kosovo Myth with conservatism, Serbian 

chauvinism, and Orthodox clericalism it is important to situate this first outburst of Kosovo 
idolatry back into its cultural and political context. This reminds us of the broader spate of 
interpretational possibilities inherent in the Myth’s contents. The radical Serbian youth were the 
children of their times: they were nationalist, but also democrats and modernists, as well as, in 
their own way, cosmopolitans. They maintained close contacts, both ideological and personal, 
                                                 
237 As Skerlić writes, with a touch of sarcasm: “Folk poetry ... was, after all, the only thing the Serbian people could 
present to the world” (Skerlić 1925: 256). 
238 The Battle of Kosovo was the Leit-motiv of Serbian poetry of the 1860s, with literary magazines swarmed by 
poems entitled Kosovo, At Kosovo, Oh Kosovo, full of wailings such as “Kosovo – my bloody wound!”,  “Woe 
Kosovo!” etc. (Skerlić 1925: 155). 

 

236

with democratic revolutionaries in other parts of Europe – Italy, France, and Hungary. They 
wanted their people to join the family of free European peoples, and the Kosovo legacy was seen 
not as an obstacle but a support on that road. Each free and sovereign people had to have 
something peculiar, something purely its own, and Kosovo was felt to be this Serbian specificity 
and Serbian gift to the colorfulness of the world – just the way Herder understood national 
cultures and their respectful coexistence.  

Although the Kosovo symbolism was certainly most strongly bound with Serbian 

nationalism, this did not preclude pan-Slavic and proto-Yugoslav connections. Interestingly, pan-
Slavism, the ideology of cultural and possibly political unity of all Slavic peoples, did not arrive 
in Serbia, as might be expected, from Russia but from the Slavic circles in Central and Western 
Europe (Skerlić 1925: 140).239 While in contemporary Serbia attachment to Kosovo is 
automatically associated with attachment to Russia as Serbs’ “older brother” and natural ally, in 
the period we are talking about this was not at all so straightforward. Playing the pan-Slavic card 
was rather connected with political cooperation with the Slavic peoples of the Habsburg Empire. 
Among the Southern Slavs, many young Croatian nationalists, wishing to see the liberation of 
their people from Austrian and Hungarian dominance, found the Kosovo legend to be speaking 
to them, too. For many of them, Kosovo could be read as a symbol of South Slavic (“Illyrian” as 
it was called), not just Serbian, national pride and promise of future liberation.240  

Finally, Serbian nationalist youth was also liberal in questions of internal policy and for 

this reason was often in conflict with authoritarian Serbian governments. Contrary to the 
impression conveyed in many present-day accounts, it is not true that all Serbian elites – from 
princes and their ministers, to writers and poets, to Orthodox priests – maintained a single and 
unified front of expansionist Serbian nationalism, whose watchword was “Kosovo”. In reality, 
nationalist authorities often harassed and imprisoned nationalist youthful activists who, along 
with “avenging Kosovo”, asked for freedom of the press and constitutional checks on the power 
of the prince. In the mind of these young people, “external freedom” (national independence) did 
not make much sense if it was not coupled with “internal freedom” (democracy and rule of 
law).241 Those who wrote most enthusiastic poems about the “bleeding sore” of Kosovo were 
also the ones who wrote the first liberal political programs, and suffered for that.  

It is equally misleading to forget about the specific position and interests of the Serbian 

Orthodox Church as a social agent. Without any doubt, the Church was in this period very 
patriotic and very much politically involved. But this does not mean it did not have its own views 
of what Kosovo legacy was and how it should properly be used. For one, it did not readily assent 
to the thorough secularization and nationalization of the Myth. A good example is the history of 
Vidovdan, the name given in the folk poetry to the day of the Battle. Although this term is 
                                                 
239 The most important figures are the Slovaks Ljudevit Štur and Jan Kolar, teachers at Austro-Hungarian colleges, 
as well as the famous Pole Adam Mickiewicz, whose course on Slavic folk traditions held at Collège de France in 
Paris the 1840s did much to popularize Serbian folk poetry in the West. 
240 Patriotic Croatian authors of today, anxious to expose the chauvinistic import of the Kosovo Myth, wisely omit 
such historical details as that students of the Zagreb Catholic seminary commemorated the Battle in 1840 (Skerlić 
1925: 164); that in 1889 in Vienna celebrations of the 500th anniversary were jointly organized by Serb and Croat 
academic societies, and that the most famous Croatian actor of the day traveled to Belgrade to play Prince Lazar in 
the premiere of a play commissioned for the anniversary (Emmert 1990: 130, 208). The Croatian Romanticist 
painter Franjo Kikerez used to depict mythologized scenes from the history (or “history”) of both peoples with the 
same enthusiasm: his ‘Croatia’ embodied as the tragic defender of Western Christendom against Islam (Žanić 1998) 
is equally pathetic as his “Maiden of Kosovo” (Popovich 1991). 
241 The formula was coined by Jevrem Grujić, member of the fervently nationalist Association of Serbian Youth and 
writer of the first liberal manifesto in Serbia, persecuted and imprisoned for his liberal beliefs. 

 

237

 

hen 

e 

  

nowadays virtually synonymous with “Kosovo”, it was resisted by the Church for a quite long 
time. The term is the Serbianized form for “St.Vitus day”, but refers basically to the secular 
commemoration of the Battle’s anniversaries. As has been said, the Serbian Church dedicated 
June 15 (28)242 to Amos and Lazar; Vitus is not a saint recognized by the Orthodox. For the 
more secularized nationalist audience, Vidovdan did not have much to do with St.Vitus either – it
243– but rather 
was just a welcome coincidence that June 15 was his day in the Catholic calendar
with celebrating the nation itself, through celebrating the Kosovo heroes. To make the 
celebration more solemn, they wanted Vidovdan to be the national and church holiday, but t
Church refused to include it in its official calendar until as late as 1892. The Church also 
opposed the fervor with which young poets venerated and all but sacralized secular national 
figures such as Vuk Karadžić and Dositej Obradović. For the Church, this was blasphemy. W
the young Romanticists openly identified the “Golgotha” of Kosovo with Jesus’ Golgotha, this 
provoked severe criticism from the religious circles. In the bitter polemics taking place in th
f 
1860s, Church writers expressed their abhorrence of what they saw was pervasive heathenism o
folk poetry and the literature inspired by it (Skerlić 1925: 256).244

The 500th anniversary of the Battle of Kosovo was the first to be commemorated in an 

he 

An extremely important circumstance in the second half of 19th century was that the 

independent (“resurrected”) Serbian state, and provided the occasion for several important 
events. First, around this date the first professional historical studies of the Kosovo battle were 
made public, by the two founders of Serbian critical historiography, Ilarion Ruvarac and 
Ljubomir Kovačević. Ruvarac sifted what had been accepted as the historical record of the Battle 
of Kosovo and rejected most of it as product of poetic imagination or political fabrication; 
Kovačević demonstrated that Vuk Branković was not a traitor. Yet from our present-day 
viewpoint, what is equally if not more intriguing as their uncompromising critical and rationalist 
attitude is the fact that it stood side by side with their nationalism. Their motive in exposing 
myths as myths, which caused them much trouble amongst their myth-loving contemporaries, 
was in no way to spoil the collective image. Quite the opposite: they believed that by rectifying 
obvious untruths they were helping Serbian glory shine even brighter. Nowadays this ideological 
combination would look curious indeed.   
 
territory of real Kosovo was still in Ottoman hands. Thus in this period the appeals to the 
symbolic Kosovo as an abstract Trauma and spiritual pledge was easily, and deliberately, 
conflated with a simple call to arms, a battle cry to “avenge” and “liberate” Kosovo, and finally 
“settle the accounts” with the Turks. But just at this same time, and in Kosovo, Albanians were 
creating their own national movement.245 Like never before, Serbian and Albanian collective 
aspirations began to diverge and conflict. It is from this period that the Albanian-Serbian rivalry 
over Kosovo dates. Open conflicts and mutual victimization of Serbs and Albanians began to 
feed back into the already existing traumatizing framework of the Serbian Kosovo narrative. 
Kosovo symbolism was significantly re-territorialized. And increasingly, the enemies to be 
                                                
242 The Serbian Church uses the Julian calendar which is 13 days apart from the Gregorian, so that anniversaries of 
the Battle are nowadays celebrated on June 28. 
243 Given the possibly significant role Dubrovnik played in molding and spreading the Kosovo Myth, it may also be 
relevant that St.Vitus is the city’s patron saint. Popović however explains Vidovdan as a barely Christianized pagan 
holiday, based on the cult of Vid, the ancient Slavic god of light (1998: 71-87).  
244 It is helpful to remember such details today, when the Serbian Church seems to be, to say the least, much more 
tolerant to sacralization of the nation. 
245 For Albanian political development in this period see Vickers 1998, Malcolm 1998; a Serbian view is presented 
in Bogdanović 2006. 

 

 

238

fought “in the manner of Lazar and Miloš” were identified as Albanians rather than Turks. Yet 
the use of Kosovo as a political slogan was not uniform: the state, by definition, had to be much 
more cautious and take into account foreign policy and other concerns that the cultural elites 
could afford to ignore.246  

So Kosovo symbolism served somewhat different purposes for different actors: the 

government sought to turn a standardized, regularized version of the tradition into the 
institutionalized founding myth of the nation-state and dynastic rule; the cultural elites often used 
Kosovo to confront the government and attack its policies as inappropriate, both in internal and 
international arenas; moreover, within the elites themselves, the first criticisms arose of what was 
perceived as political abuse and unhealthy exaggeration of the Kosovo myth;247 and finally, the 
Church, by defending the more traditional receptions of Kosovo, tried to reassert its position in 
the rapidly changing environment.   
Thus while the first stage leading up to the late 18th century provided elements of the 
 
myth, this second stage rounded it off, completed its construction as a cultural structure: the 
narrative was there, the main characters were presented in relief, and the presumed centrality of 
the Myth for Serbs as a nation was slowly being impressed, through the educational system, 
upon everybody. This is what the 19th century bequeathed to the forthcoming generations. But 
what it also bequeathed was Kosovo’s fundamental ambiguity: what was its “true” message; 
what was the proper way of preserving it; what should Serbs do about the trauma inflicted in 
1389 – is there, in fact, any trauma at all? The 19th century was the first time when different 
social actors, pursuing various and often conflicting goals, reached for Kosovo as an inspiration, 
a call to arms, a spiritual reminder, an emotional bond with their fellows, or a scourge to chastise 
them. This multi-dimensionality and pragmatic versatility of Kosovo would remain its basic, 
though largely unacknowledged feature. 
 
3. An “integralist” Kosovo: the interwar period 
Real Kosovo was finally liberated - or occupied, depending on the perspective one takes - in the 
Balkan wars of 1912-13. After World War I, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (from 
1929 Kingdom of Yugoslavia) was created, bringing together the formerly independent states of 
Serbia and Montenegro and territories previously held by Austria-Hungary (Croatia, Slovenia, 
Bosnia, Herzegovina). The country was ruled by the Serbian dynasty Karadjordjević. King 
Aleksandar “the Unifier” felt it necessary to develop an ideological underpinning to his rule over 
the newly united South Slavs. He launched the ambitious cultural-policy project of “integral 
Yugoslavism”, based on the idea that Serbs, Croats and Slovenes are one and a single people, 
divided in three “tribes”. He took over from the former Serbian state the Kosovo legend in the 
function of founding myth but sought to “Yugoslavize” it. Thus the Kosovo theme figured 
prominently in many of the manifestation of this political-cultural outlook, which was officially 
dominant in the 1920s and much of the 1930s, and was often forcefully imposed along with other 
King’s policies (in 1929 the regime turned into a dictatorship). Upon Aleksandar’s assassination 
                                                 
246 The 500th anniversary celebrations, for instance, were carefully planned so as not to offend the Turks and spoil 
the relatively good diplomatic relations with the Ottoman state. 
247 The prominent playwright Jovan Sterija Popović, at first an ardent Kosovo promoter himself, in later years 
became disappointed by political instrumentalizations of the Myth and, in the foreword to his bitterly satirical play 
The Patriots (1848), warned Serbs that they would not make progress until they learned how to acknowledge their 
failings, not just their virtues (quoted in Antonijević 2007a: 89). 

 

239

in 1934, he was likened to Prince Lazar, for sacrificing himself to the unity of Yugoslavs 
(Emmert 1990: 138). 

Probably the most interesting form in which Kosovo served the ideology of dynastic 
Yugoslavism was through the then fashionable disciplines of ethnopsychology and national 
characterology. The importance of Kosovo for the “national soul” had already been stressed by 
the geographer Jovan Cvijić. In his typology of Serbian characters, Cvijić described as clearly 
superior the so-called Dinaric Highlander, whose warrior and state-building capacities he 
praised. The Highlander’s soul is centered on the memory of Kosovo and upholding of the 
Kosovo covenant.248 While for Cvijić Kosovo concerned Serbs alone, in the works of a major 
exponent of the integral Yugoslavism, Vladimir Dvorniković, it became Yugoslav. An ethnic 
Croat, Dvorniković deeply believed in the idea of the fundamental unity of South Slavs. For him, 
folk epics, especially the central Kosovo Cycle, is the true expression of the “people’s psyche”, 
the essence of the Yugoslav soul. In these poems, we hear “the voice of a people which is 
becoming a nation and which feels its state-building and Christian-cultural mission in the 
Balkans” (Dvorniković 1939: 537). “Our epics” is “ethically higher” than that of other peoples 
since it represents a stance of “struggle, resistance and ultimate sacrifice”. Our people has a 
“powerful historical organ” and is endowed with “collective popular mnesis which hardly has an 
analog in any other European people” (ibid.). The exaggeration and collective conceit are 
remarkable indeed.  

Yugoslavism found expression in the visual arts as well. The best known Croatian and 

Yugoslav sculptor, and for a time the dynasty’s favorite artist, Ivan Meštrović, sought to embody 
the Kosovo Myth in marble and granite, so that its important messages, as he understood them, 
might permanently foster the unity of South Slavs. Meštrović produced the design for a 
spectacular memorial to be erected at Kosovo Field. The project was never realized however, 
only reliefs representing individual characters (Popovich 1991: 252). 

I certainly do not wish to claim that, in the interwar period, Kosovo suddenly stopped 

being Serbian and became a common heritage binding the South Slavs. After all, that King 
Aleksandar’s projects were not very successful was more than convincingly demonstrated first 
by his assassination by Croatian nationalists, and then in 1941 when, attacked by the Axis 
Powers, Yugoslavia fell apart in less than a week. But even if one concedes that it was all just 
plain Serbian dominance cloaked in a false Yugoslavism, it does make a difference whether the 
framing was more exclusive or more inclusive. It is culturally significant that an attempt was 
made in this direction, and that for at least some non-Serbs it made sense to see Kosovo as part 
of their own legacy and inspiration.249  
 
4. The communist twist: after 1945 
                                                 
248 “The Dinaric man burns from a desire to avenge Kosovo... where he lost his independence... From there stems 
the almost unlimited spirit of sacrifice... for social and national ideal” (Cvijić 1992: 34). [Every Highlander peasant] 
“considers the national heroes as his own ancestors: with profound national and human sensibility he participates in 
his thoughts in their great deeds. ... There are even regions in which the people feel the wounds of the Kosovo 
heroes” (p. 39-40). 
249 The non-Serb Yugoslav peoples could do more with Kosovo than accept, or reject, wholesale its dynastic version. 
In an article with the telling title “In defense of the real Vidovdan”, the newspaper of a Croatian political party 
comments on the occasion of the 550 anniversary in 1939, that to conceal Serbian hegemonic policies behind the 
ideology of Kosovo is to betray its very ideals, which consist of “ethics and love of justice”, and only when they 
start treating Croats in a fair and just way will Serbs become worthy of Vidovdan (quoted in Emmert 1990: 208). 

 

240

It is often argued today that in communist times, between 1945 and the late 1980s, the 

Kosovo legacy was suppressed and forcefully forgotten. But this is not quite true: though public 
celebrations of Vidovdan were banned, the communists knew how to incorporate Kosovo into 
their ideology and make good use of it. But before they came to power, the turbulent years of 
World War II intervened, extremely interesting for our topic. On March 27, 1941, the 
government which two days before had signed the Tripartite Pact with Nazi Germany was 
toppled in a coup backed, to put it mildly, by the British secret service. The putschists, the public 
figures250 and the public opinion in favor of the coup all explicitly referred to the Kosovo 
covenant as their guide, and interpreted the rejection of the agreement with the vastly more 
powerful Germany as a reenactment of Lazar’s choice of the heavenly kingdom. Street protesters 
carried placards with slogans “Better war than the Pact” and “Better grave than slave”. The 
graves were not long in waiting, as Belgrade was bombed on April 6. 

During the war, the Kosovo theme became one of the stakes in the intra-Serb strife 

between the communist-led Partisans, the forces loyal to the King and government in exile (the 
Chetniks), and the quisling government installed by the Germans. All sides used Kosovo as 
symbolic capital in fighting cultural battles that accompanied armed ones; all of them claimed 
monopoly over the message and values of Kosovo and strove to sully the opponents by 
identifying them with the treacherous Vuk Branković. The collaborationist government used 
Kosovo rhetoric to denigrate the Partisans, throwing Lazar’s curse against them (see e.g. Emmert 
1990: 140). On the other hand, the Communist Party also liberally exploited Kosovo symbolism. 
In the flyer they distributed in July 1941, calling Serbs to join the resistance they were leading, 
the communists also used Lazar’s curse (Ćosić 2004: 157). In mobilizing people in villages they 
often employed folk rhetoric and lines from the epic poems. They sought to establish a direct 
link between the Kosovo heroes and themselves, as the new resisters to foreign occupation. But 
the Chetniks used the same language and imagery, and which side would win a village over often 
did not depend on whose speaker was more convincing (Žanić 1998: 63).251 

After the establishment of the communist regime, the Kosovo legacy was not wiped out. 

In a somewhat modified form, it remained an obligatory part of the school curricula. It was 
purged as much as possible of its religious content, and its Serbian character was played down. 
In spite of the profound hate of the communists for the Karadjordjević dynasty and all it stood 
for, their treatment of Kosovo was not totally dissimilar, at least in the intention to defuse its 
Serbianness and stress the (potential) Yugoslav commonality. Communists presented the Kosovo 
legend as part of the tradition of “our peoples”, which they took as the basis of their cultural 
legitimacy.252 Their cultural policy was basically populist: while officially claiming to have 
                                                 
250 Speaking on the Belgrade radio, the Patriarch of the Serbian Church said that the pact was a betrayal of the 
Kosovo ethic, reminded Serbs that Lazar had accepted his fate for the sake of Serbia, and that the current situation 
demanded the same sacrifice. “This morning at dawn the question [of the nation’s fate] received its answer. We 
chose the heavenly kingdom – the kingdom of truth, justice, national strength, and freedom” (quoted in Emmert 
1990: 140). 
251 It is worth noting here how selective the “denouncing” and “celebratory” discourses are in citing historical 
instances when Kosovo was invoked for political purposes. Both are glad to mention Gavrilo Princip’s assassination 
of the Habsburg heir to the throne Franz Ferdinand in 1914, since this may be seen as either terrorism or freedom 
fighting. But the denouncers never mention the 1941coup or the Partisans, because this was antifascist struggle and 
hence does not fit in the portrayal of the Myth as conducive to Serbs’ fascist behavior; Yugoslavia’s 1948 split with 
the Soviet Union is similarly unsuitable. Celebrators, on the other hand, tend to forget the Kosovo rhetoric of the 
quisling government. 
252 Being myself a pupil in Serbian schools in Titoist times, I remember we spent many hours studying the Kosovo 
poems and duly learned by heart large chunks of them. (That is how - by having learned the poems for homework - 

 

241

broken with all things past, they actually retained many features of the traditional folk ethos. 
Within this ethos they foregrounded its agonistic strand, pitting “us” (any of the Yugoslav 
peoples, or all of them together) against “them” (various foreign invaders, actual or possible). 
Analyses of textbooks from former Yugoslavia (e.g. Rosandić and Pešić eds. 1994; Žanić 1998: 
308-311) invariably point out that priority was granted to militaristic values, at the expense of the 
more peacetime, “soft” values of creativity, diligence, tolerance or intimacy. 
 
5. Milošević’s ‘Back to the future’ 
The decade of the 1980s was decisive for Kosovo both as a real place and as a symbol. The 
ethnic Albanian majority in the province increasingly demanded more autonomy, i.e. the status 
of a full-fledged republic within the Yugoslav federation.253 Political unrest was suppressed by 
force and no dialogue was opened. On the other hand, in this same period Kosovo Serbs began to 
complain they were being harassed by the Albanians and forced to move out. Hostility between 
the two peoples was growing rapidly and their political projects were becoming totally 
incompatible. The Serbian republic authorities however were not particularly receptive to 
Kosovo Serbs’ grievances, so these were taken up first by the Church254 and then by such 
institutions as the Association of Writers and the Academy of Sciences.255 This “unofficial 
nationalism”, increasingly at odds with the official line, made ample use of the discourse of 
trauma in depicting Serbian distant and recent history. It established a continuity of Serb 
suffering since 1389. It used the elements of the existing Kosovo legacy, in its most traumatic 
version possible, to make sense of contemporary developments; and vice versa, a traumatic 
interpretation of present-day events was used to reinforce a traumatic reading of the traditional 
Myth. It is in this atmosphere, and thanks to it, that Slobodan Milošević took power in 1987.256 
He aligned himself with the unofficial nationalism, but always retaining some rhetorical distance 
from it, as will be seen.  

Milošević was lucky enough to have the opportunity to celebrate the 600th anniversary of 
the Battle of Kosovo just at the moment he was at the height of his charisma. In his memorable 
speech delivered at the huge rally held at Gazimestan, the site of the Battle, on June 28, 1989 he 
was seemingly referring back to tradition, but in fact what he was saying was all about the plans 
he had for the future. He referred to the heroes of 1389 and their virtues, drawing direct parallels 
with the present. Earlier that year, Milošević had curtailed the autonomy of the Province of 
Kosovo by constitutional redesign, provoking Albanian protests whose violent suppression 
resulted in dozens of casualties. In the Gazimestan speech he presented this as a fulfillment of 
the Kosovo Covenant – not of course by explicitly boasting the dead the policy had produced, 
but by arguing that Serbia had reclaimed its dignity. 
                                                                                                                                                             
most Serbs become familiar with the characteristic topoi of the Kosovo legend, and not because they “have it in their 
blood”.) The Serbian character of the story and its heroes was made evident, but was not insisted upon. With the 
advent of Milošević, the substance of teaching Kosovo remained the same, but it was thoroughly Serbianized. 
253 After 1945, Kosovo was established as an autonomous province within the republic of Serbia. 
254 An “Appeal for the protection of Serb inhabitants and their holy places in Kosovo” signed by twenty one priests 
was issued in 1982. 
255 The actions of these three institutions during the 1980s and their political effects are analyzed in the appropriate 
chapters in Popov (ed.) 2000. For a more general overview of the Serbian intellectual opposition and its 
“nationalization” in the 1980s see Dragović-Soso 2002. 
256 A weird example of explicit traumatization for political purposes took place in 1988, when the remains of Prince 
Lazar were taken on a long journey through Serbian lands, being displayed, hailed and mourned in many towns and 
villages before arriving at the Gračanica monastery in Kosovo on the eve of the Battle’s 600th anniversary. The 
organizer was the Church, while the Milošević authorities benevolently condoned. 

 

242

Interestingly, Milošević’s recasting of the Kosovo narrative was much less traumatic than 

that of the cultural, unofficial nationalists. Actually, his 1989 speech comes closest we get to a 
“progressive narrative” of the Kosovo Trauma. It is full of optimism, problems solved, 
difficulties left behind, and new challenges bravely taken. But the irony is, while Milošević’s 
version of Kosovo Trauma was progressive on the surface, in reality it led to new traumas. His 
limitless arrogance, taken over and amplified by his followers, definitively antagonized 
Albanians and destroyed the last chances for a peaceful settlement. In the following years, the 
same happened with Serbs’ relations with other Yugoslav peoples. We may only speculate today, 
is it possible that Milošević really believed he had “resolved” the Kosovo problem and laid 
grounds for a Bright Future of Serbia “and all its citizens”, as he was fond of saying?  

But what was really Milošević’s central concern in this speech was to threaten the 

political opponents by invoking the treason of Vuk Branković and the “disunity” among Serbs as 
the “evil fate throughout their history”.257 Those who disagreed with his policies were identified 
with the legendary traitor. In this way the old epic tradition was used to legitimate the wholly 
communist practice of “differentiation”, i.e. purge of dissenters, and to underwrite a forced unity 
of mind and action. 
 
The political impact of the Kosovo Myth as used by Milošević in the late 1980s is usually 
judged simply as aggressive chauvinist mobilization. While of course this is basically correct, it 
is also important to remember that in that early period Milošević deliberately and skillfully 
mixed nationalism with socialism, or at least some kind of “welfare” rhetoric.258 And more 
generally, Milošević’s nationalism always came out packaged in somewhat civic and 
internationalist language. He never addressed his audiences as “Serbs” but always “citizens”; he 
never openly called for persecuting, let alone killing people of other nations; he was fond of 
praising “multiethnic coexistence” in Serbia. Although these rhetorical devices could be exposed 
as mere shams when compared to reality, they were not used in vain. Such ambiguities clearly 
enabled Milošević to enlist the support of many more and more diverse people than would 
otherwise be possible, because different constituencies could “read” differently his person, his 
political position, and his moves. And the masses gathering to hear Milošević at the staged-
“spontaneous” public rallies that marked the period were not just Serbs inebriated with 
nationalist frenzy and hate: they were also people deeply disappointed with the imploding real-
socialist system, desperately wishing for a change, and enjoying the feeling of new openings that 
Milošević had managed to create, deceptively but effectively, in the early years of his rule. He 
did not promise his followers the opportunity to slaughter Albanians, or anybody else – the 
aggression was unmistakably there, but usually implicit, and had to be read off from clues. What 
was promised explicitly was national rebirth, dignity, peace and prosperity. True, Milošević also 
promised to reclaim “our” Kosovo, but who exactly “we” were was not fully specified, nor were 
                                                 
257 Naumović (2008: 70-2, 173-4, 219-227) offers an excellent analysis. Antonijević (2007b: 127-8) shows the same 
ploy operating in other political speeches of the period.  
258 The editorial published on the very June 28, 1989 in the leading Belgrade daily Politika, Milošević’s chief media 
outlet, is revealing: “It is in Kosovo and around Kosovo that the destiny of Yugoslavia and the destiny of socialism 
are being determined. They want to take away from us the Serbian and the Yugoslav Kosovo, yes, they want to, but 
they will not be allowed to” (quoted in Zirojević 2000: 207, emphasis added). Mention of socialism in the same 
breath with Kosovo, and Yugoslavia with Serbia, is of course not accidental; nor is the strategic vagueness of 
“they”, which may be filled with many different names, as need dictates. 

 

243

the means to achieve it. When mentioning “battles” in his 1989 speech, he did so in such a way 
that an ordinary listener could easily choose to ignore the violent undertone.259  
 
The welcome ambiguities 
The foregoing has hopefully demonstrated how a continuous exchange between a cultural 
structure and the varying contexts in which it is enacted has produced changing but not 
unboundedly diverse performative effects. Contexts are analytically indispensable for two 
reasons. One is the necessity for actual agents to enliven the cultural structures through their 
practices, which is not to claim it is their instrumental action that determines the character of 
cultural products, or that cultural elements can be taken out of their Gestalts. The second reason 
is that cultural structures themselves have a history, which places one atop another the many 
layers of meaning inherited from the past usages. In every time- and space-located context this 
sedimented past is slightly different and therefore “the meaning” of the structure at hand cannot 
be known in the abstract. The Kosovo Myth was too often ascribed such a timeless, transparent 
and unequivocal meaning.260 

The contextual variations however profoundly depend on the multivocality inherent in 
the cultural structures themselves. Several such points of tension within the Kosovo Myth can 
now be made explicit. As Billig has long argued, ideologies, including nationalism, become 
powerful precisely thanks to their contradictory and dilemmatic character (1995: 87). The 
tensions within the Kosovo tradition may be seen as variations on the one basic theme of 
universalism and particularism, as sliding back and forth between the more narrow and 
constricted, and the more expansive and inclusive; a dialectic between the own and the shared. 
As became clear, the Myth could not have emerged at all without the sustained cultural exchange 
between Serbs and their environment.  

Some more specific ambivalences now. Take first the figure of Prince Lazar and his 
sacrifice. His identification with Christ makes it possible for believers to concentrate on this 
aspect and give the narrative a strongly religious and Christian bent (offering oneself in sacrifice 
in order to realize God’s design and His power on earth). The more atheistically minded, at the 
same time, may take Lazar as an able secular leader and commander. The sacrifice of Lazar and 
his army can and has often been, at least since 19th century, interpreted as aimed at the future 
salvation of the Serbian nation and state; but a more religious interpretation is also possible and 
not uncommon, where the subject of redemption is a broader category - of Christians, or even the 
whole of humanity. Although in recent times, the message of Kosovo has often been taken to be 
primarily one of establishing absolute, blood-drawn boundaries between “us” and “them”, this is 
not necessary. Lazar’s sacrifice can be taken as fighting a generalized evil, or even evil within. 
                                                 
259 Though the word for “battle” Milošević used, bitka, is primarily related to war, it may – like its English 
equivalent – also denote something neutral, a struggle, an effort to achieve something. How Milošević exploits the 
double meaning is notable, in what is probably the most often quoted passage from this speech: “Nowadays, six 
centuries later, we are again in battles and facing battles. They are not armed ones, although such cannot be ruled out 
either. But whatever they are, battles cannot be won without resolve, courage and sacrifice, the virtues that were 
present at the Kosovo Field on that long-past day.” This is the militaristic side, but the very next sentence reads: 
“Our main battle today refers to the achievement of economic, political, cultural and generally social prosperity. For 
approaching more rapidly and successfully the civilization humans will live in in 21st century.” Quoted from: 
www.uio.no/studier/emner/hf/ilos/BKS4110/Eksamensoppgaver/BKS4110%20V07.doc 
260 Works which acknowledge the changing meanings of the Myth but without dismissing its relevance are the least 
frequent. Good examples are the brief analyses by Bieber (2002) focusing on the political aspects, and Bakić-
Hayden (2004) with a more cultural-hermeneutical approach. Zirojević (2000) provides a condensed account of the 
historical background. 

 

244

Further, Lazar’s and Miloš’s sacrifice can be understood as purely collectivist, patriarchal and 
pre-modern message, as the imperative for individuals to give up all that is theirs, including their 
bare lives, for the benefit of the collective. Yet it can also be interpreted in a much more 
universal manner, as an instance of a very basic ethical principle of overcoming selfishness and 
egoism for a noble goal. Similarly, by their self-chosen personal sacrifice both Lazar and Miloš 
stand out powerfully as figures, so that they can be seen as strong individual personalities who 
have the courage to make difficult decisions and take all the consequences – and not just as 
slaves to a rigidly collectivist ethos. 

Against the background of ex-Yugoslav wars of the 1990s, much has been made of the 

While discourses using Kosovo are almost always performative rather than descriptive, 

presumed psychological displacement by Serbs from the original “Turks” of the epic poetry onto 
today’s Bosnian Muslims or Kosovo Albanians. But to the extent that the Kosovo Myth teaches a 
lesson in unconditional resistance to the enemy Other, the enemy does not have to be Muslim at 
all but can be anyone perceived as stronger and unjustly oppressing. The agonistic ethos of 
Kosovo may be mapped onto many different situations; it is not so much the clash between “us” 
and specific “them” as the courage of absolute withstanding against the powerful, the heroism of 
fighting against all odds, for honor and justice.261 The more unequal the battle, the greater the 
imperative to act this way, and the more “Kosovo-like” it becomes. So the “Turks” of today may 
well be Western nations and politicians, and particularly the US, because they are the most 
powerful and at the same time are perceived to be imposing things on Serbs.262 We may go back 
to the two opposed discourses and better understand how they reinforce each other through 
confrontation, at least from the Serbian side: the logic is “the more the powerful Other defames 
us, the more we shall embrace precisely what they defame, so as to show how proud, 
courageous, impossible to buy, Lazar- and Miloš-like we are, still”. 
 
what exactly their action-implications – their illocutionary and perlocutionary effects – will be is 
not foreclosed. Kosovo has often been used to prompt people to go to war, but it can also inspire 
other kinds of action. One can plausibly fight one’s own “Kosovo” in many realms of life, and 
without any blood spilled. As was said before, the wide diversity of historical moments and 
political causes in which the Kosovo covenant was invoked testify to its flexibility. A remarkable 
recent instance happened in 2001, when on June 28 the Serbian government, headed by the 
super-modernist and pragmatic Prime Minister Zoran Djindjić, extradited Slobodan Milošević to 
the International Criminal Tribunal in the Hague. Djindjić apparently took no notice of the date 
but advised that it was Vidovdan and that many people would take that to heart, he felt 
compelled to address the public. In his speech broadcast that evening, Djindjić attempted to turn 
the whole Kosovo symbolism upside down: for the sake of our own and our children’s future, he 
said, we must give up the commitment to the “heavenly kingdom” and finally opt for the 
“earthly” one: for life, prosperity and happiness. His attempt seems to have failed. He did not 
win over any of his opponents, and even some of his supporters might have been made a bit 
uneasy by this radical recoding of the axial Serbian story. Appeals to the “earthly kingdom” did 
not become any more frequent in the public sphere in the following years – on the contrary. But 
the irony is, it would be quite imaginable to construct a Kosovo-based argument in favor of 
Milošević’s extradition: a state handing voluntarily a former president over to an international 
                                                 
261 But Emmert (1990: 142) obviously overstates the matter when he claims that the Kosovo ethic is “democratic, 
anti-feudal, with a love for justice and social equality”. 
262 Kosovo covenant was also evoked on the occasion of Yugoslavia’s break with Stalin in 1948. A completely 
different context, enemy, even the “we”: but a similar cultural-psychological logic. 

 

245

  

court could, for example, be construed as an expression of Serbs’ unconditional belief in the 
ideal of justice and therefore readiness to sacrifice their more immediate interests to upholding 
higher values. We cannot know if this alternative rendition of the argument would have been 
more successful, and even less if it would have helped Djindjić avoid the assassination two years 
later. 263 
 
Trauma as a speech act 
Rather than attempting to give a clear-cut answer to whether Kosovo is or is not Serbian Trauma, 
we are now in a position to approach the question in a more fruitful way. In the language 
pragmatic perspective, both can be true at the same time. Trauma may be seen as a speech act, a 
continually discursively produced condition which stands in mutually constitutive relations with 
the contextual circumstances. In this sense, it is “there” as a cultural meaning-structure, 
Eyerman’s “referent”, or Živković’s “entrenched story”. But this does not imply that Trauma is 
actively felt by people, that it is located somehow within them, that it affects them uniformly and 
unavoidably, or that there is some mysterious connection between being Serbian and the Trauma.  

Over the centuries, the thematic cluster of Kosovo has become a traumatizing, or at least 

potentially so, interpretive framework readily available to Serbs for making sense of their 
collective experiences. Though to call it a “master narrative” would be stretching it too far, the 
Kosovo legend has certainly been the most widespread, familiar, habitual and easily usable story 
Serbs have had to explain things to themselves. This framework, although not absolutely 
conditioning, still did facilitate or funnel a traumatic rendering of a series of collective events, 
especially during the 19th and early 20th centuries, and then again in the last three decades, that is, 
whenever Albanian-Serbian rivalry over real-life Kosovo re-territorialized the Myth. These 
events in turn provided empirical fodder which reinforced the traumatic strand in the Myth. And 
in periods when the traumatic interpretations were especially powerful, they would spill out into 
ways of narrating the situations quite unrelated to (real or symbolic) Kosovo. At such moments, 
the Kosovo Trauma would become metaphoric shorthand for timeless and metaphysical “Serbian 
suffering”.  
 
The bards of Trauma 

In her interesting typology of nationalisms, Ramet (1995) uses Serbs as the example of 

“traumatic” nationalism, one that draws its energy “from a reinterpretation of Serbia’s history in 
terms of suffering, exploitation, pain, and injustice” (1995: 103) and laments that “Serbia is the 
wronged party, the universal victim, the martyr, the Jew, the new Job” (1995: 119). Yet Ramet’s 
claim that this dates back only to the late 1980s is unacceptable. The Trauma was not, and could 
not have been, invented from scratch. At that moment it already had a lengthy history.264 Those 
youngsters of the 1860s did not wail for nothing. 
                                                 
263 The nationalists would never forgive Djindjić for extraditing Milošević, and in particular for doing that on 
Vidovdan. Djindjić’s assassins, an organized crime group, said they had killed him because he was a “traitor”. But 
criminals can hardly be expected to speak the truth, so the importance of Djindjić’s radically anti-mythical attitude 
in all this should not be overestimated.  
264 Ramet’s argument is in fact quite contradictory. She relies heavily on psychoanalysis and the concepts such as 
repression, projection and compulsive repetition, while at the same time arguing that Serbian traumatic nationalism 
arose only in 1986, as a “new phenomenon” manufactured by “elite manipulation” (1995: 103, 105). One is tempted 
to say that Ramet’s essay is an illustration of how much one loses by not employing the theory of cultural trauma, 
with its injunction to clearly identify the elements of the trauma process. 

 

246

But in one thing Ramet is right, and that is the major role of the Serbian Orthodox 

Church, and other agents of unofficial, cultural nationalism in the 1980s, in constructing an 
especially insistent, and occasionally quite morbid, traumatic version of Kosovo symbolism. It 
has already been mentioned that in that crucial period the cultural nationalists and Milošević in 
power had many things in common, but the division of labor was retained: Trauma for the priests 
and the writers, and victories and Bright Future for the government. 

In those years Trauma was being produced at a rather feverish pace. It was then that some 

of the major publications in this regard appeared. These are worth examining in some detail. 
Their authors were “cultural”, seemingly non-political actors – priests, theologians, poets. All of 
them were immediately recognized as the main exponents of the contemporary, traumatic 
Serbian nationalism by both their adherents and their critics. But what is more interesting is to 
what extent they, too made use of the ambiguous doubletalk we already encountered in various 
other performances, like in Milošević’s Gazimestan speech.  

Let us begin with the simplest, because most overt, case of Matija Bećković, the foremost 
poetic bard of the new nationalism. His collection of poetic essays entitled The Service (1990) is 
a veritable compendium of traumatic themes. 

Here is what he says: “Kosovo is the most expensive [or: most precious, dearest] Serbian 

word. It was paid for by the blood of the whole people. With that price in blood it became 
enthroned on the throne of the Serbian language. ... As times goes by, it is more and more 
uncertain whether the Kosovo wound will make us heavenly or swallow us” (Bećković 1990: 
47).265 For Bećković, the Battle of Kosovo mythically and mystically instituted Serbs as a 
collectivity, and once this happened, nothing can ever change: “Folk poetry proves [!] that the 
fate of the Serbian people was resolved by just one word: the prince preferred the heavenly 
kingdom. The word was given once and for all and it can not ever be recalled” (p. 49). 
Furthermore, Serbs are and have nothing but the legacy of Kosovo: “Kosovo is the equator of the 
Serbian planet. The roof of its upper world and the foundation of the lower one. ... Kosovo is the 
most important thought, the greatest project of the Serbian culture” (p.49). In vain would one 
look for any other substance of Serbhood: “We have no firmer footing, nor more powerful 
spiritual focus. Kosovo is the fireplace around which the Serbian people is gathered, the 
mainstay around which it is weaved together, the cradle in which it was raised” (p. 68). At the 
same time, Kosovo is Serbs’ contribution to the world – the only one, it seems, and their sole 
accomplishment: “[It is] the name for what is the most precious that we have given to the 
Christian civilization. ... Heritage and bequest of Serbian art and spirit to the humankind” (p. 49). 
And back to the Trauma: “Kosovo is the deepest sore, the longest memory, the most vivid 
recollection, the most beloved ashes of the Serbian people” (p. 68).   

It could be objected that, this being poetic discourse, exaggeration and other genre-
specific figures may be excused. But the problem is that this book, like others by Bećković, 
regularly sold in thousands of copies, is taken as a political statement. It is not meant as just an 
expression of the freely creative impulse of an individual, but both its writing and its reading are 
located deliberately within the grey zone between poetic license and political responsibility. 
 
before, belongs to the contemporary landscape since it was only with its modern edition that it 
became known to the general public. Its author was Nikolaj Velimirović, an anti-communist 
bishop of the Serbian Orthodox Church active before WWII who died in emigration. Velimirović 
is a controversial figure in Serbia – much revered in the Church for his theological writings and 
                                                 
265 Živković (2001b) offers a detailed analysis of Bećković’s sinister metaphors. 

The next major Trauma-producing publication from the 1980s, although written decades 

 

247

for his presumed suffering in the hands of the Nazi and the communists, and at the same time 
heavily criticized by the liberals for his anti-Semitism and antidemocratic conservatism (Byford 
2008).  

In Velimirović we see much more clearly than in Bećković the operation of the 

universalism/particularism dialectic. The first thing to be noted about Velimirović’s essays on 
Kosovo, entitled by the editors Kosovo and Vidovdan (Velimirović 1988), is how much Christian 
humbleness and martyrdom, and how little overt aggressiveness, one finds there. A theological-
philosophical novella presents a conversation between the dying Prince Lazar, anguished by the 
dilemma whether his choice was right, and an angel reassuring him that the choice was not of 
death but of life and ultimate salvation. The martyrdom at Kosovo was necessary, because self-
deserved by Serbs’ alienation from God. This-worldly, bodily and material death and 
forthcoming suffering under the Turks is a necessary price to pay for spiritual redemption and 
thus the only true survival and advancement in the future. In another essay, Kosovo is again 
described not as a defeat but a victory: “Wrong are those who argue that Kosovo stopped the 
wheel of our history... On the contrary, it was Kosovo that made us a great people. It is our 
people’s Golgotha, but at the same time our people’s resurrection” (p.69). Serbs are here 
presented in the universalistic Christian key of redemption through suffering. 

The more exclusivistic effects are accomplished by a detour: suffering “earns” a sort of 

moral absolution in advance: “From now on”, says the angel to Prince Lazar, “whatever happens 
with your people will pull it away from the deceitful, fleeting and vacuous love of this world and 
elevate it increasingly towards the eternal heavenly love” (p. 34, emphasis added). Then, real life 
politics is reintroduced, but also by detour: “When our entire social and stately, cultural and 
political life is penetrated by the idea of the superiority of the heavenly over the earthly, we will 
have fulfilled the Prince’s bequest” (p. 103). Yet – how shall we know this “penetration” is 
complete, how do we measure it?  Further on: “Vidovdan demands purification from hate, 
selfishness and vanity. Vidovdan commands reconciliation with God and with the brothers.” 
(And they are who exactly?) “Vidovdan thunders with damnation against the traitors of the 
people’s faith and people’s mission.” (How do we recognize them?) Yet, it should not be 
overlooked that in the entire book there is hardly an objectionable line - no battle cries, no calls 
to spilling blood, no explicit hate or contempt of others. And this surface feature makes its 
messages – however they are decoded – more acceptable. 

Velimirović’s texts are an early example of a discursive move that would become 

common from the 1980s on: a rhetorical depoliticization of Kosovo, in order to wage quite 
political battles by ostensibly metaphysical means. In the preceding phrases we see how a 
rhetorical sacralization of politics opens up a dangerous space of arbitrariness.  The precise 
content of the “Kosovo covenant”, and therefore of its possible political operationalizations, are 
kept utterly vague. Elimination of shared and testable criteria of political performance invites the 
intrusion of self-appointed interpreters of what actually is the fulfillment of the Covenant. This is 
what prompted the ethnologist Ivan Čolović to coin his superb formula of Kosovo as “the golden 
bough of Serbian politics”.266  
                                                 
266 “Who manages to seize it, even if in words alone, who becomes the priest in the temple of sacred Kosovo, his is 
the power, too”. Kosovo is the “sacred name of power”, the word the authorities use to appoint and legitimate 
themselves, as wielding a “privilege and duty of the guardians of the national sanctity”. Since power is understood 
as not a political institution but a “mystical union”, no one really wants to inquire into the origins, history and 
meaning “sacred Kosovo” (Čolović 2001: 195-197).  

 

248

But the arguably most powerful Trauma-engendering product of this period was the book 

From Kosovo to Jadovno by an active Orthodox bishop, Atanasije Jevtić (2007 [1987]). The 
book, in addition to a couple of author’s essays on Kosovo themes, consists basically of 
documenting instances of victimization of Serbs at the hands of others, the first part being 
devoted to (real) Kosovo in the 1980s, and the second to the Croatian quisling state during 
WWII.267 The vacillation between the universalizing (Orthodox, Christian, human) thrust and the 
particularization of Serbs as a special people provides the basic dynamic of the text, and is 
propelled by sustained doubletalk taking place between the textual surface and the implied, half-
buried messages. Thus the programmatic text “The Kosovo Covenant” opens with the 
universalistic assertion that “all” writers on Kosovo agree that “the whole topic of Kosovo, 
particularly its rendition in folk poetry, is in fact a distinctly Serbian experience of Christianity” 
(p.375). The vacillation is sometimes felt in one and the same sentence: “This speaks to us about 
Lazar’s, and all our people’s, commitment to the Heavenly Kingdom as the enduring and 
imperishable, eternally meaningful substance of human life and history” (p. 389). Like in 
Velimirović, political implications are treated with strategic open-endedness: “We Orthodox 
Serbs... are fighting simultaneously for the earthly and the heavenly kingdom and in both cases it 
is one and the same spiritual battle that we are waging” (p.387) Or: “The liturgical moment of 
victoriousness, this supra-temporal time of the Heavenly Kingdom, made its appearance in our 
history as spiritual victory whenever Serbs manifested their Kosovo covenant and commitment, 
whenever they sought primarily the Kingdom of God and Eternal Justice” (p. 394). (How do we 
know it happened?) 
 
least potentially present, in the relentless production of Trauma by the sheer quantity of gory 
detail, by insistence on crimes against Serbs (without ever remotely mentioning crimes 
committed by them), and by the simple placing side by side the accounts of two very different 
settings, as if they were intimately connected by the metaphysical logic of Serbian suffering.269  
. 
Serbhood as victimhood  
Although multivocal, the Kosovo tradition does tend to funnel Serbian collective self-
construction along certain paths. Kosovo does not produce them by itself, since other factors also 
contribute, but it does a lot to sustain them. Two of such paths are especially prominent. One, 
which has an elective affinity with the traumatic weave in the Kosovo Myth especially in the 
versions reviewed above, is self-identification as victims, and the other is verbal grandiosity.  

At the explicit level, aggression as a response to victimization is rejected.268 But it is at 

That “we” have always been victims of evil others is, of course, not an exclusively 

Serbian idea. But Serbs seemed to have developed it rather elaborately and to stick to it with 
much enthusiasm (Jansen 2000). The most troubling consequence is the tendency to think of 
                                                 
267 Jadovno, the name of a pit where the Ustasha were throwing bodies of slain Serbs, is meant as the metonymical 
designation for all Ustasha crimes against Serbs.  
268 “God is our witness that we do not wish any evil to the Albanians” (p.120). In the Preface, another publicly 
visible nationalist bishop, Amfilohije Radović, writes that testimonies presented in the book are not meant as an 
appeal to revenge and hate, but as a “sound of alarm to come back to ourselves and our historical self-awareness, 
and an evangelical appeal to repentance and sober rationality”. 
269 The three bards were of course not the only producers of Trauma in the late 1980s: “The Kosovo wounds were 
carried and are still carried today as their own by each and every Serb. They are incurable” (Tasić and Djuretić eds. 
1991: 117). “Serbs pledged themselves to the holiness of Kosovo and they have been making it sacrifices in blood 
for six centuries already. They do not know why they are doing it, but they have to” (the poet Gojko Djogoin 1990, 
quoted in Čolović 2001: 196) 

 

249

“us” in morally righteous terms, to routinely assume own moral superiority presumably wrought 
by suffering.270 A corollary is a difficulty to engage in collective soul-searching, self-criticism 
and self-censure.271 

The basic ambiguity of the Kosovo story, deriving from the reversal of defeat into victory 

effected very early on in the religious writings, has made it possible to use it for “having it both 
ways”, as it were: to be at once a victim and a winner, and to claim moral capital on both counts 
– by virtue of suffering, and by virtue of coming out on top. The ruse is that, as Milosevich 
(2000: 74) puts it, “the martyr always triumphs”. Or, in Giesen’s (2004) terms, Kosovo seems to 
be available as both “triumph” and “trauma”, even though Giesen presents the two as mutually 
exclusive.272   

Furthermore, claim on victimhood often turns into a monopolization of it. Especially in 

strained, Trauma-favorable periods, the circle of legitimate victims tends to be restricted to “us”. 
Instead of broadening the category of victims and expanding the circle of the “we” that 
Alexander (2004a: 1) sees as an important part of the trauma process, here we have a contrary 
trend of shrinking of the “we”. The solidarity of others is not sought, perhaps it is even 
discouraged. This seems to be going on right now, with a perceived “lack of understanding” for 
Serbs on the part of the West fuelling further alienation and sinking deeper into an exclusive-
victimhood language of identity. It is also manifested in the spiteful opposition of the Serbs’ 
“celebratory” discourse to the observers’ “denouncing” one. 

Claiming moral superiority on the basis of the supposed purifying effects of suffering 

may be read as an assertion of particularism through reference to some kind of universal 
standards. Another paradoxical move of this kind is asserting Serbian specialness by insisting on 
the megalomaniac exceptionalism of Kosovo. The statements such as: “No Christian nation has 
in its history what the Serbian people has – none has Kosovo. ... Kosovo is one of its kind in the 
twenty centuries of the Christian world” (Velimirović 1988: 68- 69), or “How to present this 
spiritual meaning of Kosovo for Serbs to the public opinion, when there is no analogous example 
in the world heritage?” (a newspaper article from 1998, quoted in Čolović 2001: 208), or “Six 
centuries ago, nothing on the globe happened more important than the battle at the Kosovo 
Field” (Bećković 1990: 47) – are not at all uncommon, in spite of their extravagance, and could 
easily be heard even from ordinary people.  

This is connected with the second path along which the Kosovo legacy tends to channel 

Serbian narratives: the tendency of grandiloquence when the nation is concerned. Somehow, 
Serbs have developed the belief, or at least the habit, that when talking about matters of nation 
and state only lofty and pompous terms are in order. A down-to-earth language of Serbian 
patriotism is mostly lacking. The “great”, read national, has been decoupled from the “small” – 
the petty things of daily life, economy, work, ordinary human effort, patient building of an 
ordered collective life. Of course, Serbs have been doing all these things over the centuries, just 
as any other people, but this sort of endeavor has been kept at the side of the profane, at a 
distance from the sacrality of the nation. It is not easy to verbally perform as a good Serb talking 
about daily, this-worldly matters; there is no “sacralization of the everyday” in a Weberian sense. 
                                                 
270 How both Serbs and Albanians in (real) Kosovo ground their political claims in the morality of victimhood is 
analyzed in Zdravković 2005.  
271 Čolović (2002: 7-9) provides an ironic summary of what, following Malkki (1995), might be called Serbian 
mythico-history, revolving around victimhood and moral purity. 
272 Referring to Giesen’s terms does not mean I also subscribe to his view that “there is no way to imagine a land 
beyond the liminal horizon of triumph and trauma” (Giesen 2004: 112). Quite the contrary. I am convinced there is a 
way, if not “beyond”, then at least below such high-flying notions. 

 

250

The problem is that this contributes to a devaluation of Serbia’s civilian accomplishments during 
the two centuries of its modern history and hinders the recognition of the nation’s good in the 
democratically defined common good.  
 
The Myth as a speech act 
Not just the Trauma is continuously produced through discourse, but also the Myth itself – its 
existence, solidity, rootedness, Serbianness, utmost significance etc. are routinely re-created by 
deploying claims to that effect. Compared to the production of Trauma, the tone of this process is 
less emotional, and its social location is mostly academia. But perhaps this only makes its effects 
smoother. By being repeated so many times, and having come from the authorized mouth of the 
expert, the claims slide into everyone’s routine way of expressing whatever they have to say.  

For example: the book that purports to offer a conclusive historian’s view of the Battle of 

Kosovo, published bilingually in Serbian and German on the occasion of 600th anniversary 
(Tasić and Djuretić eds. 1991), opens with these words: “Undoubtedly the most important event 
in the entire history of the Serbian people, the Battle of Kosovo...” (p.7, emphasis added). A 
contribution to the same volume claims: “The Kosovo commitment has become not just the 
national idea but that inner trait that makes a Serb a Serb” (p. 14). Another one: “The theme of 
the Battle of Kosovo is part of our destiny, we know it was built into the foundations of our 
consciousness and our culture... The Battle of Kosovo, this is us” (p. 49).  

Not even the very sober scholars are exempt. For all her critical detachment, Zirojević 
(2000: 195-196) lists all the historical moments when Serbs’ behavior was “determined by the 
Kosovo myth” without making at all clear whether she is reporting others’ arguments or arguing 
the same herself. Or, here is how the prominent ethnologist Dušan Bandić attempts to salvage the 
idea of Kosovo as a continuous living tradition, against contrary evidence. In the early 1990s, his 
team undertook field research in rural Serbia about the actual presence of the Kosovo tradition, 
talking to hundreds of typical peasants, farmers with little education (Bandić 2001). The general 
conclusion was that the Kosovo Myth had been forgotten: knowledge of it was poor, confused 
and erroneous (Bandić 2001: 462).273 But Bandić does not give up: the Myth has survived in a 
covert form, he argues, through its “hidden message” that lives “a secret life in rural people’s 
consciousness” (Bandić 2001: 463, 465), and that is the belief that Serbs are God’s chosen 
people, better (more honest, pious, generous etc.) than the others.274 Bandić then goes on to 
“recognize” this hidden message of Kosovo in a wide variety of popular lore concerning Serbian 
identity and world politics. The connection that Bandić presents as self-evident between these 
manifestations and the supposedly still living Kosovo Myth is tenuous however, and counts on 
the complicity of the reader. Like many others, Bandić is here accomplishing a performative 
task: by producing statements on the vitality of Kosovo symbolism and its centrality for Serbs he 
hopes to produce these states of affairs as “social facts”.275  
                                                 
273 Informants, for example, mostly knew nothing of Prince Lazar, except that he had died at Kosovo; a majority did 
not know what the “Covenant” was – what kingdom Lazar had chosen. 
274 But since the belief in one’s choseness, which in practice usually boils down to belief in one’s superiority, is 
found in very many nations (Smith 2003), what is then so specifically Serbian about Kosovo? Bandić prefers to 
sidestep this difficulty. 
275 This is how it works: “Lazar’s fate is a metaphor by which Serbs represented their historical fate. They – and this 
is the message of the myth – are a chosen, heavenly people which had to pay a high price for its heavenly status. ... 
Such a self-characterization became deeply engraved in the consciousness of the Serbian people. .... Whenever a 
new ‘Kosovo’ would appear on the horizon, Serbs would choose a solution similar to Lazar’s. ... [and] without any 

 

251

 
The year 1999: the Trauma, a trauma, and the importance of registers 
In 1998-99, the symbolism of Kosovo was rather brutally terrestrialized again, with the outbreak 
of armed conflicts between the Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army and the Serbian state forces. 
In March 1999, NATO intervened, to prevent humanitarian catastrophe as was said, and bombed 
Serbia for two and a half months. The Trauma as a cultural script was now confronted with a 
real-life, palpable trauma of being victimized by the high-technology weaponry of the world’s 
most powerful military machinery, in the first attack on the territory Serbia after WWII. What is 
more, the immediate trauma was directly connected with Kosovo as the site of the original 
Trauma, and the victimization was widely perceived as thoroughly unjust, because “we are just 
trying to keep what is ours”. All the reasons were there to expect that the trauma of NATO 
bombardment would be experienced and narrated in a framework heavily determined by Trauma. 

Indeed, we find in the official statements, from Milošević’s speeches to the posters 

displayed in regime-organized protests (Jansen 2000) all the staple motifs of the Kosovo Myth. 
In his analysis of Vojska, the official magazine of the Serbian Army, during the months of 
bombing, Nedeljković (2007: 46-51) documented abundant use of mythical images.276 Yet one 
must not overestimate the significance of such official constructions. Nedeljković himself (2007: 
50) adds a precious footnote, based on his personal experience as a Serbian Army reservist: 
according to what he saw amongst his fellows, the influence of Vojska on ordinary soldiers was 
virtually nil. Protracted exposure to traumatic circumstances produced nothing but disaffection, 
skepticism and, finally, complete alienation from the official rhetoric. 

A similar duality arises between two other sets of data collected at roughly the same time 

(end of 1990s-early 2000s) which reveal vastly different, even contrary ways of talking about 
Kosovo. For the first set we are again indebted to Nedeljković (2007: 52-66) who wished to 
complement his analysis of symbolic production of the nation in official discourse with 
individual elaborations of such mythical matrices. Between 1998 and 2000, Nedeljković 
collected 200 written compositions by Belgrade university students, mostly in the Ethnology 
department, on the topic of “Serbhood” (Srpstvo). Although “Kosovo” was not a required theme, 
most respondents wrote about it. It was discussed in emotional rather than intellectual terms, and 
a lot of mythical rhetoric was used: Kosovo is “the only true core of truth”, “the heart of Serbia”, 
when one goes there “one is stunned into silence, and time comes to a halt”, “Kosovo is the 
insistent strong pain in the soul”, “Serbia’s cancer” (Nedeljković 2007: 60-61). What may first 
be noted is the contrast in which these constructions stand with the previous ethnographic data, 
collected only several years before by Bandić. What provides at least a part of the explanation is 
the differential educational levels of the two samples, but not in the direction the social scientist 
would assume: the almost illiterate peasants were less colonized by the mythical discourse than 
the urban college students. This again strongly supports the idea of the importance of the 
educational system in inculcating the allegedly inborn Serbian Trauma.  

The other set of data comes as close as any to providing insight into the vernacular 

receptions of the symbolic Kosovo. It was collected in 2001/2002, one year after the fall of the 
Milošević regime in 2000 and two years after the war of 1999. In 300 interviews with ordinary 
                                                                                                                                                             
doubt, have behaved as a ‘heavenly’ people is expected to do” (Bandić 2001: 461, italics added). These sentences, 
needless to say, are not in any way derived from the field data.  
276 Such as: Kosovo as Serbian “sacred land” that must be defended at all costs; Kosovo as Serbia’s “heart” and 
“core”; reminders of Lazar’s covenant and the heavenly kingdom; the Golgotha metaphor; assimilation of Milošević 
to Prince Lazar; etc. 

 

252

citizens of Serbia about the recent political past and prospects for the future, one question 
concerned the issue of (real) Kosovo and the 1999 NATO bombing. It was in this conjunction 
that many respondents went back to Kosovo as symbolic legacy.277 While for many (by no 
means all) of them the events of 1999 were in various ways traumatic, it is striking how much 
this was not couched in the language of the Trauma. People were familiar with the symbolic 
tradition and generally ready to respect it, but not to let it determine their political stands. They 
seemed to be caught between demands of rational positioning in the real world and moral 
sentiments of pride and justice that are so strongly associated with the Kosovo theme. The result 
was a perplexed and contradictory, but open attitude, an honest attempt to think through a 
difficult topic.278 Well-known tropes, like Serbian cradle, were often employed in casual, even 
ironic manner. As one interviewee said: “Kosovo is the sacred Serbian land – I'm joking”. 

As a general trend, the most frequent frame to discuss the topic was a simple and assured 
assertion that “Kosovo is ours”, however it was not expressed in metaphysical but rather in more 
political and legal – though doubtfully more commendable – terms that saw Kosovo as part of 
Serbia, and Serbs as the state’s entitled nation. Another general trend was for interviewees to 
acknowledge, with a sort of aggrieved resignation, that Kosovo was “lost”.279 And if this was a 
trauma for them, it was of a rather mild kind and one that they had already begun to overcome.  

So how do we account for the difference between extensively mythicized discourse in the 

first data, and uneasy realism in the second? The main reason lies, I believe, in the different 
framings of the discussion, resulting in two different registers people were employing in 
response to these framings. Nedeljković’s assigned title-appeal, “Serbhood”, framed the issue in 
a way inviting the mythologizing approaches: srpstvo is a very loaded word, abstract and 
general, with a flavor of artificiality; it is not a word one would use in daily speech (not even 
when talking “grand” of the nation). The other data were obtained within a questionnaire that 
provided a frame doubly different from the former: it was a) rational, and b) concrete, personal 
and experiential. Interviewees were called on to express their own personal experience, and 
reflections on that experience, to refer to the concrete events, dates, facts from their life and the 
collective life insofar as it affected them. The whole research design did not encourage 
generalized and empirically unfounded proclamations. Thus different discursive registers 
produced divergent ways of talking about the same things. Maybe even if the very same people 
participated in both studies, they would have talked just as differently.  
 
                                                 
277 The project's title was “Politics and everyday life” and its findings are presented in Golubović et al. (eds.) 2003, 
an English summary in Spasić 2008. 
278 Examples from some interviews: “I don't feel Kosovo to be part of my country, because in effect it is not, but 
essentially it is. I mean, if you take history, religion... Now many people say history is no longer important, because 
it all happened ten centuries ago, but it is... It has always been part of Serbia – all that we were told, the cradle of the 
Serbian people, this and that, but it is true. Now, what it is really... but actually it no longer is, so...” Or, another 
person: ”And the battle of Kosovo, we pledge to Nemanja, Lazar, this and that, well, they are long gone, this is 
nonsense. They were fighting with maces, and now is the time of the atomic bomb”, but immediately goes on to say: 
“Now we must try to save Kosovo, the Serbian cradle, with all those cultural monuments that are now being burned 
down.” A clear tension between pragmatism and loyalty to tradition: “This Kosovo Myth, it has maintained Serbs 
for centuries... It is the heart of Serbia... Miloš Obilić, and other known and unknown heroes... But true, definitely, 
we cannot live of such myths”. 
279 Such as: “We saw Kosovo was gone”, “We were deceiving ourselves concerning Kosovo, it had been sold out 
long ago”, “It hurts so much, but I think Kosovo will be taken away from us”, “I'm very much emotionally attached 
to Kosovo, but I think it is lost and we'd better invest this energy into something else.” 

 

253

A common language in which to disagree 
The long history of the Trauma as a cultural structure has produced the layered character of its 
meanings. Yes, Kosovo “means” something to most Serbs, probably even “matters” to them. But 
the contents of this are of highly diverse origin.280 Furthermore, the layered meanings are only 
partly expressible in words. They may also involve a whole range of vague feelings of 
uneasiness, discontent and shame, provoked by the recent collective experiences. For example, 
remembrances of the Myth’s association with Milošević’s aggressive and failed policies – that is, 
with wars, national humiliation and international isolation – might also have become part of the 
Kosovo Trauma as it is experienced today, but will hardly be made explicit. So within the 
seemingly singular Trauma some meaning layers may be closer to the surface and more readily 
articulable, and others buried, tacit and possibly activated only in the mode of Herzfeldian 
“cultural intimacy”. This would amount to more than just different “meanings”, to profoundly 
different emotional and moral import – including outright irrelevance of the Trauma to an 
individual Serb.281 What remains, and what really acts as the much-extolled “connective tissue” 
among Serbs, is the identical language they are all familiar with, the “entrenched” symbolism of 
Kosovo which rhetorically brings all of these differences together, without admitting it. The 
name remains the same, providing the impression of stability, and making it possible to 
ostensibly “revive” the myth, while in fact it is turned in nothing but “a useful cliche or linguistic 
stereotype, a ‘reference’ and argument in ideological use” (Djerić 2005: 30) 

It has been pointed out repeatedly that the tropes of the Kosovo legend, especially in its 

epic guise, have often been used as political devices for censuring, condemning and morally 
polluting political opponents. We have seen how the labels of Vuk Branković or, conversely, of 
Lazar and Miloš, were exchanged by all kinds of political forces since the mid-19th century.282 
This practice has been so widespread in Serbian political life that the function of internal 
exclusion may qualify as an even more prominent pragmatic function of the Trauma than 
aggression towards others.  

Nevertheless, mechanisms of exclusion may be more subtle than the explicit pollution of 
the opponent by calling him/her traitor. An excellent instance of this more oblique deployment 
was provided in 2006 by the then-Prime Minister Vojislav Koštunica, a democratic but 
conservative nationalist. Speaking at the symbolically highly charged site of the ancient Serbian 
monastery of Hilandar in Greece, Koštunica said: “Everybody knows what Kosovo means to us.” 
Let us have a closer look at this phrase. If “everybody” knows it, then those who feel they do not 
know exactly what Kosovo means to them, or to others, cannot help feeling excluded or better, 
completely obliterated (since they do not even belong to the “everybody”). If everybody 
“knows” something, then there is no need at all to articulate, discuss and argue this something. 
Finally, who the “us” are is similarly unclear (Serbs? all of them, or only some? and if some, are 
                                                 
280 As Brubaker (2004: 56) reminds, the materials that collective identities are made of include, in addition to the 
more famous mythomoteurs and other long-term factors, “also the moderately durable ways of thinking and feeling 
that represent ‘middle-range’ legacies of historical experience and political action”. 
281 When Dragnich and Todorovich begin their “blood” phrase with: “Kosovo is many diverse things to different 
living Serbs...”, this is not acknowledgment of fundamental disagreement. What they have in mind is variation 
within the range of the beautiful, sublime and awesome. In celebratory discourses in general, apparent diversity of 
meanings is often used to enhance the effect of all-Serbian pervasiveness of the Myth, but it never includes the idea 
that Kosovo to an individual Serb may mean something unpleasant, irritating, silly, boring, embarrassing, old-
fashioned, awkward, worn-out etc. 
282 These practices, extremely detrimental to the development of a democratic political culture, were dubbed by 
Naumović (2005) „quasi-ethnic identity splits“. 

 

254

these the patriots, the religious, the members of Koštunica’s party, or his voters, or...? ) Hence, 
by a short and seemingly innocuous phrase, all those who do not recognize themselves in it are 
excluded from the community. But this is done implicitly, which makes the move less 
conspicuous and harder to challenge: one would not really know how to protest it.283 The main 
paradox involved in both “simple” and “complex” strategies of exclusion is that the Trauma, 
presented as what binds Serbs together, is used to produce internal and self-inflicted 
traumatization of the national polity, by deepening cleavages within and preventing their 
pacification.  

The period after 2000 has been characterized by a series of new twists and turns on the 
Kosovo theme. After the war of 1999 and installment of international administration in (real) 
Kosovo, its status has remained unresolved, which has been conducive to a mood in Serbia in 
which it is quite easy to score political points by rising the rhetorical stakes in discussing 
Kosovo. While the unofficial, more personalized and private discourse, as the quoted interviews 
show, was characterized by a general rationalism and open-mindedness, the discourse produced 
by political elites has sought a re-traumatization of Serbian attitude to Kosovo. Instead of being 
gradually replaced by more rational and realistic, policy-oriented suggestions, the tropes of the 
Kosovo myth in its most traumatic cast have been liberally employed by elite actors, who were 
trying to outdo one another in upholding the sanctity of Kosovo. As the verbal stakes were 
continuously risen, it has become all but impossible to talk about Kosovo, real as well as 
symbolic, in anything but the most elevated tone. A whole range of positions on the issue have 
become discursively unavailable or excessively costly.284 On the other hand, uttering or 
supporting empty phrases like “Kosovo is Serbia!”, “We shall never give up Kosovo!”, “Kosovo 
is our sacred land!” and so on, costs nothing and can bring some profit – if anything, the profit of 
showing that one is not sticking out. So everybody choose to repeat these phrases, without much 
thinking. At the same time people harbor all kinds of doubts and grudges against the symbolic 
prevalence of Kosovo and its mythical impingements on current Serbian policies, but are 
extremely uncomfortable to express them in public, or even to themselves, because the 
sacredness of the topic has been so extremely enhanced. This private and subdued attitude of 
weary irritation is almost impossible to pin down: one may feel it in muttered remarks, half-
voiced comments, and grumbles overheard, on people’s faces and in tone of their voices.  

This came out in elections. The year 2008 was hot with passions, with (real) Kosovo’s 
proclamation of independence in February, ensuing protests turned riots in Belgrade, including 
the raiding and burning of US embassy, sudden icing of Serbia’s relations with the Western 
countries etc. The public sphere reverberated with innumerable invocations of Lazar’s oath and 
the bequest of the Kosovo heroes, particularly in the campaign of the ultranationalists. 
Nevertheless, in February 2008 the incumbent democratic president Boris Tadić was reelected, 
and in parliamentary elections held in May a democratic coalition marked a convincing 
                                                 
283 Some more examples of the same device: “A Serb is the one whom Kosovo concerns” (Bećković 1991: 68). Or, 
in Velimirović (1988: 71) “Those who scowl at Kosovo; those who belittle, condemn, or hate it... such are not real 
Serbs... And real Serbs ... ought to thank the Lord for having given them Kosovo, their pride and comfort.” And here 
is Jevtić (2007): “It is impossible for the word Kosovo to be mentioned without causing profound agitation in each 
of us Serbs. ...  There is no Serb who has not thought, spoken, written about Kosovo, grieved over it and resurrected 
through it” (pp.374, 116). Italics added. 
284 When in 2007 prominent journalist Boško Jakšić argued in his column in Politika for Serbia’s acknowledgment 
of an independent Kosovo, this provoked public uproar that lasted for weeks.  

 

255

victory.285 True, Tadić and his democrats, just like almost everybody on the Serbian political 
scene, consider Kosovo’s independence illegal and fight it as they can; but whatever one may 
think of their Kosovo policy, it is not extremist, and, even more to the point, it contains virtually 
no mythologizing rhetoric. Pointing in the same direction, polling data show that, when asked to 
list the most important problems Serbia is currently facing, people place (the status of real) 
Kosovo below “unemployment”, “low living standard” and “corruption” (SMMRI 2008).286  
If we then go back to the question – is there a Kosovo Trauma for Serbs?, the answer 

may be “yes”, provided that we understand its proper location: it does not dwell in Serbs, but in 
the discursive space between them. And the Trauma itself involves a whole knot of entangled 
traumas, not necessarily those that bards of the Trauma strove to inculcate. The deceptive 
simplicity of the noun, Kosovo, might also hide traumas of the Yugoslav wars, including the 
“trauma of perpetrators”; the trauma of being caught in an irresolvable conflict with a 
neighboring people, Albanians; the trauma of Serbia’s exclusion from European integration; the 
trauma of living in a faulty democracy and continuing economic stagnation. And also, perhaps, 
the trauma of being forced into a traumatic identity and lacking the language in which to express 
one’s dissent without being called a traitor. 
 
 
References 
. 
Alexander, Jeffrey 2004a. “Toward a theory of cultural trauma”, pp. 1-30 in J. Alexander et al. 

Cultural Trauma and Collective Identity, Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Alexander, Jeffrey 2004b. “On the social construction of moral universals: The ’Holocaust’ from 
war crime to trauma drama ”, pp. 196-263 in J. Alexander et al. Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity, Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Antonijević, Dragana 2007a. Karađorđe i Miloš: Između istorije i predanja, Beograd: Etnološka 

biblioteka. 

Antonijević, Dragana 2007b. Karađorđe i Miloš: Mit i politika, Beograd: Etnološka biblioteka. 
Anzulović, Branimir 1999. Heavenly Serbia: From Myth to Genocide, New York and London: 

New York University Press. 

Bakić-Hayden, Milica 2004. „National memory as narrative memory: The case of Kosovo“, pp. 
25-40 in: Maria Todorova (ed.), Balkan Identities: Nation and Memory, New York: New 
York University Press. 

Bandić, Dušan 1997 [1990]. Carstvo zemaljsko i carstvo nebesko, Beograd: XX vek.  
Bandić, Dušan 2001. „Tajni život kosovskog mita“, pp. 461-66 in: Zbornik Etnografskog muzeja 

u Beogradu: 1901-2001, ed. by J. Bjeladinović- Jergić. 

Bećković, Matija 1990. Služba, Beograd: SKZ 
Bieber, Florian 2002. „Nationalist Mobilization and Stories of Serb Suffering: The Kosovo myth 

from 600th anniversary to the present”, Rethinking History 6(1): 95–110. 

Billig, Michael 1995. Banal Nationalism, London: Sage. 
                                                 
285 The coalition “For European Serbia” (Democratic Party/G17) won 38.40% of the vote and 102 seats in 
Parliament, while the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party came second with 29.45% (78). Source: CeSID, 
http://www.cesid.org/rezultati/sr_maj_2008/index.jsp 
286 From mid-2005 to end of 2008 the percentage of respondents placing Kosovo among chief problems ranged on 
the average between 20 and 30%, with scores over 40% at only 4 points over that period, all concentrated around 
February 2008, and falling to 13% in November 2008. At the same time, “Unemployment” scored consistently 
between 45 and 60%, and “Low living standards” between 35 and 45% (more than one priority could be listed). 

 

256

Blagojević, Miloš 1990. „Vojno-istorijske rekonstrukcije kosovske bitke“, pp. 11-22 in S. 

Ćirković (ed.), Okrugli sto Kosovska bitka u istoriografiji, Beograd: Istorijski institut. 

Bogdanović, Dimitrije 2006 [1985]. Knjiga o Kosovu, Beograd: SKZ.  
Bojović, Boško 1991. „Geneza kosovske ideje u prvim postkosovskim hagiografsko-

istoriografskim spisima“, pp. 15-28 in: N.Tasić and V. Djuretić (eds.), Kosovska bitka 
1389. i njene posledice, Beograd: SANU. 

Brubaker, Rogers 2004. „Ethnicity without groups“, pp. 50-77 in: Ethnicity, Nationalism, and 

Minority Rights, ed. by S. May, T. Modood and J.Squires, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Byford, Jovan 2008. Denial and Repression of Anti-Semitism: Post-communist Remembrance of 

the Serbian Bishop Nikolaj Velimirović, Budapest: CEU Press. 

Cvijić, Jovan 1992. [1931] „Dinarski, centralni i panonski tip“ (from the study Balkansko 

poluostrvo), pp. 33-88 in: B. Jovanović (ed.), Karakterologija Srba, Beograd: Naučna 
knjiga. 

Čolović, Ivan 2001. Dubina, Beograd: Samizdat B92. 
Čolović, Ivan 2002 [1997]. The politics of symbol in Serbia: Essays in political anthropology, 

translated by Celia Hawkesworth, London: Hurst. 

Ćirković, Sima 1990. „Kosovska bitka kao istorijski problem“, pp. 109-118 in: S. Ćirković (ed.), 

Okrugli sto Kosovska bitka u istoriografiji, Beograd: Istorijski institut. 

Ćosić, Dobrica 2004. Kosovo, Beograd: Novosti. 
Di Lellio, Anna and Stephanie Schwandner-Sievers. 2006. “The Legendary Commander: the 

construction of an Albanian master-narrative in post-war Kosovo”, Nations and 
Nationalism, 12 (3): 513–529. 

Djerić, Gordana 2005. Pr(a)vo lice množine, Beograd: IFDT/Filip Višnjić. 
Djordjević, Dimitrije 1991. „The tradition of Kosovo in the formation of modern Serbian 

statehood in the nineteenth century“, pp. 309-330 in: Wayne S. Vucinich and Thomas A. 
Emmert (eds.), Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval Battle, Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. 

Dragnich, Alex and Slavko Todorovich 1984. The saga of Kosovo: Focus on Serbian-Albanian 

relations, Boulder, CO: East European Monographs. 

Dragović-Soso, Jasna 2002. Saviours of the nation?: Serbia’s intellectual opposition and the 

revival of nationalism, London: Hurst. 

Dvorniković, Vladimir 1939. Karakterologija Jugoslovena, Beograd: Geca Kon. 
Duijzings, Ger 2000. Religion and the Politics of Identity in Kosovo, London: Hurst. 
Emmert, Thomas A. 1990. Serbian Golgotha: Kosovo 1389, New York: Columbia University 

Press (East European Monographs). 

Eyerman, Ron 2002. Cultural Trauma, Port Chester, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Giesen, Bernhard 2004. “The trauma of perpetrators: The Holocaust as the traumatic reference of 

German national identity”, pp. 112- 154 in: J. Alexander et al, Cultural Trauma and 
Collective Identity, Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Golubović, Zagorka, Ivana Spasić and Đorđe Pavićević (eds.) 2003. Politika i svakodnevni život: 

Srbija 1999-2002, Beograd: IFDT. 

Jansen, Stef 2000. „Victims, Underdogs and Rebels: Discursive Practices of Resistance in 

Serbian Protest”, Critique of Anthropology Vol. 20(4): 393–419. 

Jevtić, Atanasije 2007 [1987]. Od Kosova do Jadovna, Trebinje/Vrnjci: Manastir Tvrdoš/ 

Bratstvo sv. Simeona Mirotočivog. 

 

257

Kantorowicz, Ernest 1957. The King’s Two Bodies: A Study in Mediaeval Political Theology, 

Loma, Aleksandar 2002. Prakosovo: slovenski i indoevropski koreni srpske epike, Beograd: 

Princeton:  Princeton University Press. 

Balkanološki institut SANU. 

Lord, Albert B. 1964. The Singer of Tales, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Luci, Nita and Predrag Marković 2008. „Događaji i pozornice različitosti: označavanje ’sebe’ i 
’drugih’ na Kosovu“, pp. 280-309 in: Gordana Djerić (ed.), Intima javnosti, Belgrade: 
Fabrika knjiga/IFDT.  

Malkki, Liisa 1995. Purity and Exile: Violence, memory and national cosmology among Hutu 

refugees in Tanzania, Chicago & London: University of Chicago Press. 

Mihailovich, Vasa D. 1991. „The tradition of Kosovo in Serbian literature“, pp. 141-158 in: W. 
S. Vucinich and T.A. Emmert (eds.), Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval Battle, Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 

Mihaljčić, Rade 1990. “Motiv izdaje u istoriografiji”, pp. 23-31 in: S. Ćirković (ed.), Okrugli sto 

Kosovska bitka u istoriografiji, Beograd: Istorijski institut. 

Naumović, Slobodan 2005. „The social origins and political uses of popular narratives on 

Serbian disunity“, Filozofija i društvo 26: 65-104.  

Naumović, Slobodan 2008. Neo-tradicionalističke ideje u političkom i javnom životu Srbije na 
kraju 20. veka, Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Ethnology and Anthropology, Faculty 
of Philosophy, University of Belgrade 

Nedeljković, Saša 2007. Čast, krv i suze, Beograd : Zlatni zmaj/Odeljenje za etnologiju i 

antropologiju Filozofskog fakulteta. 

O’Brien, Conor Cruise 1987. God Land: Reflections on Religion and Nationalism, Cambridge 

MA &d London: Harvard University Press.  

Palavestra, Predrag 1991. Književnost – kritika ideologije, Beograd: SKZ. 
Popov, Nebojša 2000. „Traumatology of the party-state”, pp. 81-108 in: N. Popov (ed.), The 

Road to War in Serbia, Budapest: CEU Press. 

Popov, Nebojša (ed.) 2000. The Road to War in Serbia: Trauma and Catharsis, Budapest: CEU 

Press.  

Popovich, Ljubica 1991. „The Battle of Kosovo (1389) and battle themes in Serbian Art“, pp. 

227-308 in: W.S. Vucinich and T.A. Emmert (eds.), Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval 
Battle, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Ramet, Sabrina Petra 1995. “The Serbian Church and the Serbian Nation”, pp. 101-122 in: S. P. 
Ramet and Lj.S. Adamovich (eds.), Beyond Yugoslavia: Politics, Economics, and Culture 
in a Shattered Community, Boulder: Westview Press. 

Rosandić, Ružica and Vesna Pešić (eds.) 1994. Ratništvo, patriotizam, patrijarhalnost: Analiza 

udžbenika za osnovne škole, Beograd: Centar za antiratnu akciju/Grupa Most. 

Sells, Michael A. 2002. “The Construction of Islam in Serbian Religious Mythology and Its 

Consequences”, pp. 56-85 in: Maya Schatzmiller (ed.), Islam and Bosnia: Conflict 
Resolution and Foreign Policy in Multi-Ethnic States, Montreal&Kingston: McGill-
Queen’s University Press. 

Smith, Anthony 1997. ‘Golden Age’ and National Renewal”, pp. 36-59 in: Geoffrey Hosking 

and George Schöpflin (eds.), Myths and Nationhood, London: Hurst. 

Smith, Anthony 2003. Chosen Peoples: Sacred sources of national identity, Oxford: Oxford 

University Press. 

 

258

SMMRI 2008. “Attitudes concerning Kosovo”, Monthly Omnibus Survey, press release, 

Strategic Marketing Research, Belgrade, December 2008. 

Spasić, Ivana 2008. “Serbia 2000-2008: a changing political culture?”, Balkanologie, Vol. XI, n° 

1-2, décembre 2008, http://balkanologie.revues.org/index1282.html 

Tasić, Nikola and Veselin Djuretić (eds.) 1991. Kosovska bitka 1389. i njene posledice: 

Međunarodni simpozijum Himelstir 1989, Beograd: SANU. 

Tomashevich, George Vid 1991. „The Battle of Kosovo and the Serbian Church“, pp. 203-226 
in: Wayne S. Vucinich and Thomas A. Emmert (eds.), Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval 
Battle, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

van de Port, Mattijs 1999. “‘It Takes a Serb to Know a Serb’: Uncovering the roots of obstinate 

otherness in Serbia”, Critique of Anthropology, Vol. 19(1), pp. 7–30. 
Velimirović, (Bishop) Nikolaj 1988. Kosovo i Vidovdan, Šabac: Glas crkve. 
Vetlesen, Arne Johan 2005. Evil and Human Agency: Understanding Collective Evildoing, 

Cambridge: Cambridge U. Press. 

Vickers, Miranda 1998. Between Serb and Albanian: A History of Kosovo, London: Hurst. 
Volkan,  Vamik  D.  1996.  “Bosnia-Herzegovina:  Ancient  Fuel  of  a  Modern  Inferno.  Mind  and 

Human Interaction 7:110-127. 

Volkan,  Vamik  D.  2001.  “Transgenerational  transmissions  and  chosen  traumas:  An  aspect  of 

large-group identity”, Group Analysis, 34(1): 79-97. 

Volkan, Vamik D. 2002. “Bosnia-Herzegovina: Chosen trauma and its transgenerational 

transmission”, pp. 86-97 in: M.Schatzmiller (ed.), Islam and Bosnia, 
Montreal&Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press. 

Vucinich, Wayne S. and Thomas A. Emmert (eds.) 1991. Kosovo: Legacy of a Medieval Battle, 

Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.   

Zdravković, Helena 2005. Politika žrtve na Kosovu, Beograd: Etnološka biblioteka.  
Zirojević, Olga 2000. „Kosovo in the Collective Memory“, pp. 189-211 in: N.Popov (ed.), The 

Road to War in Serbia: Trauma and Catharsis, Budapest: CEU Press. 

Žanić, Ivo 1998. Prevarena povijest: Guslarska estrada, kult hajduka i rat u Hrvatskoj i Bosni i 

Hercegovini 1990-1995. godine, Zagreb: Durieux. 

Živković, Marko 2001a. „Serbian Stories of Identity and Destiny in the 1980s and 1990s”, 

unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Chicago 

Živković, Marko 2001b. „Kosovo is the most expensive Serbian word: political enchantment and 

Milošević’s rise to power“, Anthropology of East Europe Review 19(1). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

259

Solidarizing with the kidnap victims: 

On the generalization of trauma across a fragmented civil sphere 

 
 
 

 

 

Carlo Tognato 

Associate Professor 

Department of Sociology 

National University of Colombia, Bogota 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Faculty Fellow 

Center for Cultural Sociology 

Yale University 

Trauma Book Project, edited by Jeffrey Alexander and Ron Eyerman 

260

 
 

Athens, June 14-16, 2009 

 

Introduction  
 
Colombia has been plagued by one of the longest civil conflicts in the world. The two guerrilla 
movements that are still fighting – the FARC and the ELN - have been around for almost half a 
century and therefore constitute two of the oldest guerrilla movements that are currently known 
worldwide. Over the past decades different governments in Colombia have initiated peace talks 
with different groups of illegal combatants. Some of them have been remarkably successful as 
they have led to the total demobilization of the groups involved, and have managed to 
reincorporate their members into civilian life and democratic politics. In the case of the FARC 
and the ELN, however, all contacts have been unfruitful. In the course of the 1990s the conflict 
between these two groups and the state became increasingly gruesome and in the aftermath of 
9/11 the two guerrilla groups were reclassified by the European Union and the US State 
Department as terrorist organizations. 

  One of the weapons such groups have used over the years in part to pressure the 

Colombian government and in part to finance their illegal operations has been the kidnapping of 
thousands of people. Their victims have been subjected to infrahuman conditions while in 
captivity, often stacked behind barbed-wire fences in the thickest corners of the Colombian 
jungle, in some instances tied for years to trees with chains at their necks, undernourished, with 
little medical assistance, and under the constant threat of execution. At the end of 2007 their 
suffering reached and moved international audiences as some of the kidnap victims made a 
ghostly appearance in a video the FARC circulated to prove their ‘survival’. Traditionally, 
Colombian society has not regarded kidnapping as a national trauma. Instead, different segments 
of society have read it differently depending on their political sympathies. Since 2007, however, 
kidnapping has slowly appeared to be on its way to be coded as a generalized trauma. 

In his theory of cultural trauma, and more generally in his theory of the civil sphere, 

Alexander suggests that, to generalize trauma, and therefore to establish far-reaching solidarity 
ties between the victims and the rest of society, advocates must tap into the discourse of civil 
society and articulate a grand narrative that can translate the pain of the victims into the pain of 
all. There are societies, however, that do not exclusively rely upon such discourse for the purpose 

 

261

of establishing generalized solidarities. Parts of them may well do so but others may resort to 
alternative discourses of political legitimation. Alexander’s theory of the civil sphere does not 
take stock with such situations that, as Reed (2006) would put it, entail “conflict without 
complicity”. As a result, his theory does not address the actual mechanics by which a fragmented 
civil sphere can still yield generalized forms of solidarity. Baiocchi (2006), on the other hand, 
takes stock with the possibility of fragmentation but in the end falls short of accounting for the 
actual mechanisms by which the civil sphere overcomes it. This leaves us with a theory of 
cultural trauma that lacks of an underlying theory of the civil sphere to account for the way 
trauma gets generalized in culturally divided societies. 

The ongoing process of generalization of the trauma of the victims of kidnapping in 

Colombia shows that multivocal performances along the fault line that breaks the Colombian 
civil sphere into two distinct discursive zones constitute the elusive mechanism by which 
generalized solidarities can still emerge across a plurality of social groups that appeal to two 
alternative discourses of political legitimation to sustain solidarity among their own members. 
This, in turn, bears an important implication upon Alexander’s theory of cultural trauma. The 
generalization of trauma in deeply divided societies does not necessarily call for one single grand 
narrative of pain, as Alexander would otherwise predict, and definitely cannot call for one at its 
early stage. Rather, it is sufficient for society to count upon a set of different narratives of pain – 
one for each discursive zone that makes up the civil sphere - and upon a battery of multivocal 
performances to zip all narratives of pain together. For the purpose of my analysis in this paper I 
will focus on the latter. 

Bringing multivocal performances into the analysis has two unexpected theoretical 
implications. Effective multivocal performances display an enigmatic Mona Lisa-type of 
authenticity that exceeds the analytical correspondence Alexander establishes in his cultural 
pragmatics between the notions of authenticity/inauthenticity and those of fusion/defusion. Also, 
they yield a distinct type of cultural reenchantment that has curiously escaped the analytical 
lenses of neo-Durkheimian sociology. The former point entails that an extension of Alexander’s 
theory of the civil sphere inherently calls for a theoretical extension of his cultural pragmatics 
while the latter suggests that the horizon of enquiry of the neo-Durkheimian tradition within 
contemporary sociological theory might be even broader than imagined in the past three decades. 

 

 

262

Theorizing the generalization of trauma across a fragmented civil sphere 
 
The generalization of trauma is nothing but a process by which a society redesigns and expands 
the horizon of solidarity among its citizens so as to include the victims of trauma, give them due 
recognition, and embrace their suffering as if it were directly experienced by society at large. For 
this reason any theory about the socialization of trauma must rely upon some theory that 
accounts for the way societies go about articulating solidarity ties among their members. And 
this is why Alexander’s theory of cultural trauma implicitly relies, and must rely, upon his theory 
of the civil sphere. 

According to Alexander democracy is not just a set of technical rules. Rather, it is “a world 
of great and idealizing expectations” and “overwhelming feelings of disgust and condemnation.” 
This world – he insists - is articulated through “a transcendental language of sacred values of the 
good and profane symbols of evil”287, “a historically contingent final vocabulary” – to put it with 
Rorty (1989, pp.  190-192) – by means of which people express what brings them together and 
what sets them apart.288 Citizens will consequently tap into this specific language – the discourse 
of civil society - to define  the horizon of solidarity among their members, and therefore to 
generalize the traumas of particular sets of victims to the rest of society.289 

Not all societies, though, exclusively rely upon the discourse of civil society for such a 

purpose. As Baiocchi (2006) has recently shown, parts of them may well do so but others resort 
to alternative discourses of political legitimation. Alexander’s theory of the civil sphere does not 
take stock with such situations that, as Reed (2006) would put it, entail “conflict without 
complicity”. As a result, his theory cannot cover those instances in which generalized solidarities 
might still emerge despite the fact that the civil sphere is fragmented and only few social groups 
in society can, want or accept to resort to the discourse of civil society to sustain them. 

To understand how traumas get generalized in such societies, it is therefore necessary to get 

an analytical grip upon the mechanisms by which they still manage to build generalized 
solidarities despite their fragmentation. As Baiocchi (2006) explicitly takes stock with the 
phenomenon of a fragmented civil sphere, it makes sense to start from him to look for insights. 
Baiocchi shows that two different discourses of political legitimation contended the control over 
                                                 
287 Alexander (2006: 4). 
288 Alexander (2006: 56). 
289 Alexander and Smith (1993). 

 

263

the Brazilian civil sphere in two major public debates. In the 1979 debate over crime – he 
suggests – the liberal discourse of civil society played just an emergent role whereas in the 1992 
debate over the impeachment of the President it achieved dominance, and progressively did so in 
the course of the crisis.290 According to Baiocchi such debates did not only show a symbolic 
contest about the application of the two discourses but also about the validity of one over the 
other.291 His analysis, however, does not dwell upon the concrete mechanics by which one 
discourse disputes the cultural terrain of the other. It does not account for the way members of 
society switch from one to the other, nor does it theorize upon the switch. It does not say if, for 
example, switching is like jumping or like crossing a bridge. Nor does it clarify whether the 
switch ultimately reflects the population ecology of the socio-demographic bases that underpin 
each discourse or whether it is a matter of cultural work. In short, Baiocchi suggests that a civil 
sphere can overcome its fragmentation as a result of a process of symbolic competition among 
different discourses of political legitimation but does not explain how exactly one discourse will 
achieve cultural dominance over the others. 

Most importantly, though, Baiocchi’s argument seems to imply that generalized solidarities 

can emerge out of a fragmented civil sphere only when such fragmentation is on its way to get 
resolved. And the closer the civil sphere comes to it, the more general the solidarity ties society 
will be able to establish among its members. This, in turn, implicitly rules out the possibility that 
a fragmented civil sphere could sustain the emergence of generalized solidarities and that, for 
example, the victims of trauma in culturally divided societies could still achieve society-wide 
recognition of their suffering. The ongoing process of generalization of the trauma of the kidnap 
victims in Colombia, however, shows that generalized solidarities may still emerge despite a 
fragmented civil sphere that keeps being fragmented. To extend Alexander’s theory of the civil 
sphere in an effort to make his theory of cultural trauma more encompassing, it is therefore 
necessary to take a step beyond Baiocchi’s argument. 

A closer look to the concrete operation of the communicative institutions of the Colombian 

civil sphere may provide useful insights as how to move forward. If one extrapolates the 
predictions of Alexander’s theory of the civil sphere to such a context, one would expect that 
such communicative institutions would carry out one unique function. That is, they would 
                                                 
290 Baiocchi (2006: 306). 
291 Baiocchi (2006: 305, 306). 

 

264

merely translate the particularistic interests of specific social groups into the more general 
interests of larger segments of society by resorting to the two discourses of political legitimation 
such segments respectively employ to establish solidarity ties among their members. Quite 
interestingly, though, with reference to the trauma of the kidnap victims such institutions have 
been lately carrying out one additional function Alexander’s analytical framework does not 
account for. That is, they have been introducing specific cultural mechanisms that work as 
revolving doors between the two discourses of political legitimation and make it possible to 
recast the moral justifications of one cultural camp into the other. It is through such revolving 
doors, in other words, that the narratives of generalization within one camp have progressively 
got zipped to those within the other. This would seem to indicate that the generalization of 
solidarity ties across a fragmented civil sphere is possible as a result of the combination of the 
two functions the communicative institutions of the civil sphere carry out under such 
circumstances. 

The ‘revolving-doors’ that make it possible to sew a fragmented civil sphere back together 

are nothing but multivocal performances along the fault lines that fracture the civil sphere. A 
multivocal performance along the fault line between two cultural systems collapses two 
simultaneous cultural performances in one, and produces the same reactions among the 
audiences on both sides by projecting different meanings within the two cultural camps to which 
such audiences respectively belong. As a result of its dual nature, a multivocal performance 
brings together two different sets of background representations, two scripts, one set of actors, 
one mis-en-scene, one set of means of symbolic production, two different sets of audiences, and 
two different systems of social power. Multivocal performances are theoretically intriguing for at 
least two reasons. First, their enigmatic Mona Lisa-type of authenticity exceeds the analytical 
correspondence Alexander establishes in his cultural pragmatics between the notions of 
authenticity/inauthenticity and those of fusion/defusion. And second, they yield a distinct brand 
of cultural reenchantment that has so far eluded neo-Durkheimian analysts. 

Alexander argues that a cultural performance is effective when it is perceived by its 
audiences as authentic and this has to do with the fusion of the elements that make up the 
performance: the background cultural representations, the scripts, the actors, the audiences, the 
mis-en-scene, the means of symbolic production, and social power. According to Alexander the 
better such elements fuse together into a coherent whole, the more authentic the performance 

 

265

will come across, and the more effectively will it project meaning upon its audiences. Multivocal 
performances, however, display a type of authenticity that does not fully square with the idea of 
fusion Alexander introduces in his cultural pragmatics. Quite curiously, for them to be effective, 
they cannot get to the point of resolving their inherent enigma. They must preserve an element of 
ineffability. They cannot stop being equivocal. They must leave a permanent doubt in their 
audiences as whether they are actually about one performance or whether they might be about 
something else, as well. In other words, the elements that constitute each of the simultaneous 
performances that respectively make up a multivocal performance cannot afford to perfectly fuse 
together and separately become fully convincing for the multivocal performance to appear 
authentic. The slight defusion one perceives on one side of the cultural fault line along which a 
multivocal performance unfolds therefore contributes to the fusion of the elements on the other 
side and vice-versa. The two simultaneous performances that make up an effective multivocal 
performance, in other words, would seem to be tied together like in mobia strip. If one could 
paint them, they would probably look like one of Escher’s works. Multivocal performances, as a 
result, paradoxically lose authenticity in case of excessive fusion. And the more the do so, the 
less effectively will they work as revolving-doors that can zip together the narratives of 
generalization of solidarity that may emerge at different points of a fragmented civil sphere.  

The peculiar kind of authenticity that characterizes multivocal performances also entails a 
curiously distinct type of cultural reenchantment that seems to have escaped the analytical lenses 
of the neo-Durkheimian tradition within contemporary sociological theory. Neo-Durkheimians 
have suggested that modern complex societies can still attain cultural reenchantment. Only, 
unlike in traditional societies, this is no longer automatic but rather quite contingent since 
authenticity in performance is much more difficult to achieve in complex societies than in 
simpler ones. This notion of cultural reenchantment tacitly relies upon an idea of plenitude of 
meaning which is in turn implicitly linked to Alexander’s idea of authenticity through fusion. As 
effective multivocal performances paradoxically entail some peculiar element of defusion in 
order to be authentic, then one would have to conclude that they either do not yield cultural 
reenchantment despite their authenticity, if reenchantment is necessarily only about plenitude of 
meaning, or they do so but in that case cultural reenchantment must be possible even when the 
attainment of full meaning is beyond reach. Since the former is a self-contradiction, given that 
authenticity is a definitional dimension of cultural reenchantment, then the latter must apply. 

 

266

This implies that in modern complex societies that are fragmented into different cultural spaces 
effective multivocal performances along the fault lines between them can still deliver cultural 
reenchantment. Only, this time this will curiously exhibit a strange dialectic between plenitude 
and deficiency of meaning that will very much resemble the way fusion and defusion are tied 
together in authentic multivocal performances.  

After explaining why the generalization of the trauma of the kidnap victims in Colombia is 

relevant for the purpose of theory development on at least four fronts – that is, the extension of 
Alexander’s theory of cultural trauma as well as of his theory of the civil sphere, of his cultural 
pragmatics and finally of the idea of cultural reenchantment within neo-Durkheimian cultural 
sociology – I will devote the next three sections to address the specifics of the Colombian case in 
question. 

 

The Colombian fragmented civil sphere 
 
One of the most apparent features of the Colombian civil sphere is its deep fragmentation. As 
Daniel Pecaut once observed, “if in Colombia people talk so much about memory, it is because it 
is impossible to write history. … There is no common vision that can help people define what 
occurred.”292 One might add that Colombians even lack of a common political vocabulary to 
articulate such a vision. Against such a background Colombian intellectuals have wondered 
whether it makes sense at all to talk about civil society. Some of their leading figures have 
concluded that such a category is inapplicable to their societal context. I will start this section by 
explaining why, instead, it still makes sense to talk about a Colombian civil sphere despite its 
fragmentation, and will address in the rest of this section the two discourses of political 
legitimation that currently contend the control over such a space. 

According to the anthropologist María Teresa Uribe the Colombian civil sphere is a 

“juxtaposition of different worlds”. It brings together “micro- and macro-logics that move at 
different speed” and knows nothing else but social groups with exclusively particularistic 
pretensions. Under such circumstances - she concludes - it is hardly meaningful to talk about 
civil society and it is risky to keep on acting as if it existed. The political scientist Leopoldo 
Munera agrees with this point. The idea of civil society “presupposes a highly coherent society 
with a relatively homogeneous public opinion”. It is predicated upon the existence of a diffuse 

 

267

general interest and tends to downplay conflict. As the sociologist Francisco Leal would put it, 
“civil society is the dream of a harmonic society”. For this reason – they suggest – its application 
to Colombian political reality is highly problematic.293 Their recommendation to ditch the notion 
of civil society, however, is predicated upon an equivocation. Recognizing or denying difference 
and conflict within society, after all, cannot dictate whether the notion of civil society must be 
rejected or retained as a pertinent theoretical category. The crucial question one needs to ask, 
instead, is whether the fragmentation of the civil sphere prevents civil society from carrying out 
its function within a democracy, which has to do with the articulation of generalized solidarities 
among its members. Since neither of the afore-mentioned Colombian social scientists addresses 
this point, it is legitimate to overlook their recommendation and discuss instead the cultural 
makeup of the Colombian civil sphere. I will suggest that two discourses of political legitimation 
currently contend the control over such a space. One is the discourse of civil society Alexander 
(2006) refers to in his theory of the civil sphere and the other is a non-individualistic discourse 
that resembles Baiocchi’s corporate code and that Tognato and Cuellar (2009) have recently 
labelled as the discourse of the hacienda. 

In Colombia true liberals as well as most of the Left use the discourse of civil society as 
their cultural metric of legitimacy in public life. Such a discourse is more widely used in urban 
areas and less popular within rural settings. The Marxist-Leninist discourse that for a long time 
permeated the Left during the XXth century seems to have retreated from the civil sphere and 
today the internal debates within the major leftist party – the Polo Democrático Alternativo – 
follow the cultural logic of the discourse of civil society, though not all politicians within it 
always manage to perform it with sufficient authenticity. The President of the Polo, Carlos 
Gavíria, for example, whom many identify with the more Leftist strand within his Party, is a 
constitutionalist scholar, former President of the Colombian Constitutional Court, a radical 
liberal, a vehement defender of the principle of personal autonomy of the individual, and a true 
believer of the virtue of rational discussion among citizen. 294 

In 1991 Colombia passed a new liberal constitution and the discourse of civil society 

consequently gained a more central position within the national civil sphere. Despite the new 
emphasis on the sacredness of the individual, on human dignity, personal autonomy, rationality 
                                                                                                                                                             
292 Posada Carbó, Eduardo. “Unidos contra el secuestro,” El Tiempo, July 6, 2007. 
293 “La sociedad invisible”, Alternativa, December 1996, No.5: 24-26. 

 

268

and freedom, however, the new system of secular collective representations fell short of 
providing a common political vocabulary for all Colombian society.295 As Tognato and Cuellar 
(2009) have recently shown, this resulted into the continual presence in the everyday practice of 
most of average Colombians of the axiomatic system that till then had oriented the conception of 
agency, social relations and political institutions within the Colombian civil sphere - the 
discourse of the hacienda (i.e. large farm). 

Such a discourse builds upon an organic understanding of society and therefore deems 

desirable whatever feeds into collective harmony and condemns whatever breaches it. It consists 
of a system of binary oppositions that define what is legitimate in social life and what instead 
must be resisted. The attributes on the positive side make up the patron/peón code whereas those 
on the negative side identify the bandit code. The notion of patron collapses into one figure 
elements that are political, religious, familiar, moral, and economic. The patron is the protector, 
the shelter, the moral authority, the saint, the person in charge of the workers, the lord that rules 
over his feud, and the owner of the house where everyone else is guest. The peón, on the other 
hand, is the subordinate that submits to the superior wisdom of the patron, the docile follower, 
the listener, the modest that knows his own place in society and accepts his humble part in it. If 
the patron is the head of the social body, then the peón is its hand and can claim dignity till he 
fulfils his own function. On the other hand, the bandit is the peon who decided to rebel against 
social, and therefore natural, harmony.  

As far as agency is concerned, the patron/peón code establishes that the patron be civilized, 
cultivated, compassionate, orderly, respectful, and considerate while the peón must match those 
attributes with complementary ones - modesty, docility, humbleness, good-willingness, 
reverence, and generosity. On the other hand, the bandit code defines those who reject the 
organic order of social life as barbarian, ignorant, ungrateful, disorderly, irreverent, disruptive 
and calculative. As far as social relations are concerned, the patron/peón code grounds them 
upon paternalism, loyalty, and charity whereas the bandit code structures them upon 
individualism, treason, and selfishness. Finally, political institutions according to the patron/peón 
code will be based on tradition, authority, personalism and order while bandits will build up 
institutions that are based on anarchy, rebellion, impersonality, and chaos. The fact that the 
                                                                                                                                                             
294 Rincón, Héctor. “El oso polar,” Cambio, March 18, 2002. 
295 See Palacio (1999), Estrada, 2004, Gutiérrez (1999), Morales (1998). 

 

269

discourse of the hacienda comes quite close to the corporate code Baiocchi (2006) talks about 
with reference to Brazil reflects the partial commonalities Latin American countries share in 
terms of their political development as well as their social and cultural history. 

The discourse of the hacienda spans across broad segments of Colombian society. As 

Cuellar (2009) shows, since the end of the nineteenth century, both conservatives and moderate 
liberals have tapped into it as their metric of legitimacy in public life. Today, many see Colombia 
President, Álvaro Uribe, as the quintessential embodiment of the patron. As such, his popularity 
rates do not suffer at all whenever he openly acknowledges in a press conference that he is 
having opposition congressmen followed by the Presidential Secret Police because they oppose 
the Free Trade Agreement with the US and lobby in Washington DC against it.296 The patron, 
after all, is culturally entitled to protect collective harmony and to intervene against those who 
spoil it. In a different occasion the conservative historian Eduardo Posada Carbó stressed that the 
Colombian government cannot keep saying before international audiences that in Colombia there 
is no conflict. He recommends that the government appeal to “a different discourse, more 
elaborate, more pondered, and with fewer passionate rhetorical improvisations”. In a way 
Posada’s wakeup call politely signals that the patron can surely claim epistemic authority within 
his hacienda, but anywhere else, where the principle of personal autonomy applies, observers 
will immediately object to it.297 

It would be mistaken, however, to attribute the use of the discourse of the hacienda just to 

those segments of the population that identify with the political right. The organic 
understandings of society based upon patriarchy and Catholicism that underpin the discourse of 
the hacienda are widespread in Colombia and even creep into the discourse of the leftist 
guerrillas. In occasion of the Conference the FARC summoned to celebrate its 43rd Anniversary, 
for example, the guerrilla group issued a communiqué that called Colombians “to struggle for a 
new government capable of reconciling the Colombian family.”298  

After suggesting that the Colombian civil sphere is indeed fragmented and constitutes a 
space where two discourses of political legitimation compete for control, I will address in the 
                                                 
296 “Grabando, grabando…”, Semana, May 7, 2007. 
297 Posada Carbó, Eduardo. “El estado y la opinión mundial,” El Tiempo, January 11, 2008. 
298 “Comunicado: 43 Aniversario de las FARC-EP,” Secretariat of the Central Command of the FARC-
EP, May 25, 2007, http: //www.redresistencia.org from www.farcep.org. 

 

270

next section some of the most salient features about the treatment of kidnapping in the 
Colombian civil sphere.  
 
The trauma of the kidnap victims in the Colombian civil sphere 
 
The history of kidnapping in Colombia starts on January 31, 1933, when three-year old Elisa 
Eder, daughter of an industrialist, was kidnapped. Thirty years later her father would be killed 
during an attempt of kidnapping. In the following decades “in Colombia freedom would become 
a merchandize to be exchanged for money, political rent and even rubber boots or cell-
phones.”299 Only between January 1996 and June 2008 approximately twenty four thousand 
people have been kidnapped. By June 2008 almost three thousand were still in the hands of their 
captors and almost fourteen hundred had died in captivity. Over that period the FARC kidnapped 
6,902 people, the ELN 5,422 and paramilitaries 1,187.300 Prisoners are subjected to infrahuman 
conditions while in captivity. Their life is under constant threat. In case of military rescue 
operations their kidnappers are instructed to execute them. While in the jungle they are 
completely cut off from their families and the rest of the world. They cannot receive adequate 
medical assistance. They are constantly exposed to the dangers of the jungle and to tropical 
diseases. Tying them for long periods of time or even permanently to trees with chains at their 
necks has become a rather widespread practice301. Some of them have been in captivity for more 
than ten years. Colombia President Álvaro Uribe has compared the FARC’ s detention camps to 
the Nazis’ concentration camps and Human Rights Watch has explicitly referred to their practice 
of kidnapping as a patent crime against humanity.302 Over the past two years the Colombian 
government has been subjected to increasing pressure both at home and abroad to negotiate a 
humanitarian exchange with the FARC and the ELN. The proofs of survival of some of the 
kidnap victims the FARC delivered at the end of 2007 have laid further pressure upon the 
                                                 
299 “24.000 colombianos han sido secuestrados en la última década; 1.269 han muerto en cautiverio”, El 
Tiempo, June 30, 2007. 
300 “Estadísticas generales de secuestro: Enero de 1996 - junio del 2008” and “Comportamiento de 
secuestro 1996 - junio 2008” Fundación País Libre, 
http://www.paislibre.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=blogcategory&id=28&Itemid=84. 
301 Espinosa Valderrama, Abdón. “Estigma del secuestro y al fondo cejas de Luz,” El Tiempo, December 
27, 2007; Pombo, Roberto, “Carta de un secuestrado,” Cambio, November 25, 2002; “Estadounidenses 
narran momentos del Cautiverio. ‘Las FARC son animales y bárbaros sin humanidad’,” El Tiempo, July 
12, 2008. 

 

271

Colombian government to reach a solution to the problem. Foreign governments have 
increasingly intervened on the matter, particularly Venezuela and France. On the one hand, 
Venezuela has sought to launder the international image of the FARC with the purpose of 
transforming it into the vanguard of a prospective Bolivarian Revolution in Colombia and 
beyond. And France has vowed to rescue Ingrid Betancourt, former candidate during the 2002 
Colombian presidential election and a Franco-Colombian citizen, who was kidnapped in 2002 
during her campaign. In 2007 Venezuela President Hugo Chavez was asked by his Colombian 
counterpart to mediate with the FARC to obtain the liberation of the kidnap victims. Chavez 
pushed further the internationalization of the issue by involving different foreign actors, such as 
former Argentina President Nestor Kirchner and film director Oliver Stone. By the end of 2007, 
however, Colombia President Uribe revoked the authorization he had given Hugo Chavez to 
mediate with the FARC after it became manifest that Chavez was pursuing the change of 
FARC’s terrorist status into one of belligerency. On February 4, 2008 more than ten million 
Colombians took the streets to protest and call for the immediate release of the kidnap victims. 
This constituted a historical turning point in Colombian political culture, given that public 
protests had traditionally been regarded by most of Colombians with utter suspicion. On July 2, 
2008 the Colombian army launched Operation Checkmate. After infiltrating the FARC’s lines of 
communication, two helicopters were dispatched to a camp where the FARC held Ingrid 
Betancourt, three American citizens and eleven policemen and army soldiers. The Army 
managed to convince the FARC that a friendly NGO had put the helicopters at disposal of the 
guerrilla for the purpose of transporting the ‘prisoners’ to another camp. The guards were tricked 
into delivering them to unarmed intelligence officers that posed as NGO cooperators. The fifteen 
kidnap victims were then retrieved from the camp and freed without shooting one single bullet. 
The leading national newspaper – El Tiempo - celebrated the success as a greater national 
triumph than the historic 5:0 Colombia scored in soccer against Argentina.303 

Colombians have been traditionally quite indifferent to the suffering of the kidnap victims. 
In a letter to his family one of the kidnapped, Coronel Mendieta, writes: “It is not physical pain 
that paralyzes me, or the chains around my neck that torment me, but mental agony, the evil of 
the evil and the indifference of the good, as if we were not worth anything, as if we did not 
                                                                                                                                                             
302 Vivanco, José Miguel. “Colombia: Setter to Rebel Leader Demands Release of Kidnapped Political 
Figures.” Human Rights Watch, April 15, 2002. 

 

272

exist.”304 A journalist has once compared the indifference of Colombians to that of the Germans 
before the Holocaust. War – she argues - has transformed Colombians into petty monsters that 
can no longer draw the line between good and evil. It has converted them into confused beings 
that can hardly distinguish truth from lie. War has bent their capability to react and their right to 
feel outraged.305 

In 2007, however, the situation started to change. When the FARC executed 11 regional 
congressmen whom it had kidnapped five years earlier and attributed instead their deaths to an 
attack on the part of the Colombian army, more than one million Colombians took the streets in 
protest. Still, while the front of indifference to the kidnap victims started to crack, it became soon 
apparent that the quest for a generalized recognition of their pain throughout Colombian society 
would soon stumble into one major obstacle: the deep division of the Colombian civil sphere. 
The protest in response to the assassination of the 11 congressmen, for example, soon turned into 
a Babel of discordant messages: some in favor of negotiations with the FARC to obtain the 
liberation of the kidnap victims and others harshly opposed to any concession on the part of the 
government.306 

What is most striking about the evolution of kidnapping as a public issue, is that 

Colombians have progressively managed to overcome their traditional indifference to such a 
phenomenon, but the two axiomatic systems that have been confronting each other in the civil 
sphere all along the public debate over the issue have hardly managed to erode each other’s 
cultural terrain, as one would instead expect in the light of Baiocchi’s argument. In other words, 
the fragmentation of the Colombian civil sphere has not shown any sign of resolution in the 
course of such a debate as a result of the symbolic competition between the discourse of civil 
society and the discourse of the hacienda. What instead such a competition triggered, was a 
process of consolidation of the two discursive blocs that made up the Colombian civil sphere. 
For the sake of clarity, I will here explain how that happened in one of the two camps by 
addressing the debate over the participation of the major opposition party – the Polo 
Democrático Alternativo – to the February 4 march. 
                                                                                                                                                             
303 “El rescate de los 15 mejor que el 5 a 0 a Argentina” El Tiempo, July 8, 2008. 
304 “Carta del Coronel Luis Mendieta se convirtió en símbolo de la crueldad del cautiverio en la selva,” El 
Tiempo, January 16, 2008. 
305 Duzán, María Jimena. “Y los Secuestrados, ¿Qué se pudran?” El Tiempo, March 24, 2008. 

 

273

At the end of December 2007 a Colombian 33-year old computer science engineer, Oscar 
Morales, created a group on Facebook named “One million voices against the FARC”. He tells 
that the ghostly image of Ingrid Betancourt the FARC circulated that early December to prove 
her survival, the photos of the kidnap victims in chains, and the failed liberation of little 
Emmanuel, the 3-year old boy who was born in captivity in a detention camp of the FARC 
moved him to do something about it. Soon enough, the group on Facebook brought together 
thousands of people and Oscar Morales decided to use it to call for a march against the FARC. 
Through Facebook the march was scheduled for February 4, 2008 and was organized in 115 
cities around the world. Many Colombian mass media, the private sector and the government 
joined the initiative and supported it both in Colombia and abroad. In the end, more than ten 
million people marched. The FARC reacted to the initiative by stigmatizing it as a “military 
weapon of espionage and destabilization” and as a plot orchestrated by the Colombian 
government and the CIA.307 The official newspaper of the Colombian Communist Party, on its 
part, sentenced that the march constituted a typical example of manipulation of the masses on the 
part of the capitalist mass media and of the Colombian political oligarchy.308An observer of the 
February 4 march sentenced that Colombia got to it more divided than Israel and Palestine: 
“Even on the most delicate, most useful and most human matters, it is impossible to agree. We 
are incapable of discussing with respect. There is intolerance, anger and intense pain.”309 

Reaching a decision on whether to participate to the march became a thorny issue for the 

major opposition party – the Polo Democrático Alernativo – that constituted an umbrella 
organization for many political groups on the left of the Colombian political spectrum. The 
Mayor of Bogota, a member of that party, declared he would march as a mayor and as a citizen 
because he believed in the mobilization. One of the leading senators of the party, Gustavo Petro, 
called his party to join the march but his petition was turned down by the directorate of the Polo. 
As political pressure mounted upon it, its leaders decided that they would not march but would 
rather turn up in the central square of Bogota, protest against kidnapping, and leave the square 
before the marchers reached it as planned. This way – they explained – public opinion would be 
                                                                                                                                                             
306 “Colombia contra el secuestro”, BBCMundo.com, July 06, 2007 http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-
/hi/spanish/latin_america/newsid_6275000/6275734.stm. 
307 “La Marcha de la Rabia,” Semana, February 4, 2008. 
308 Editorial, Voz, February 6, 2008.  
309 Ochoa, Luís Noé. “No nos tiremos la marcha,” El Tiempo, January 26, 2008. 

 

274

clear that they would not support a pro-government initiative.310 In an interview former Minister 
of Interior, Humberto de la Calle, joked that the decision of the Polo not to march but to 
concentrate instead in Bolivar Square sounded like Clinton’s famous statement that he smoked 
marijuana but never inhaled it.311 

The debate that immediately broke out within the camp that had been declaredly tapping 
into the discourse of civil society as its metric of legitimacy in public life was not whether they 
should rather shift to the discourse of the hacienda but instead whether the Polo was performing 
the discourse of civil society in an authentic manner. Liberal opinion-makers criticized the 
decision on the part of the Polo to condition its participation to the march. Some stressed that one 
cannot politicize barbarism and must reject it straightforwardly, irrespective of whether those 
who condemn it stand on the opposite side of the political spectrum.312 Others warned that one 
cannot condition one’s own adhesion to a march depending on whether its organizers include the 
condemnation of other forms of violence one is more sensitive to.313 Others more pointed their 
finger to the equivocal posture certain members of the Polo had been keeping towards the FARC 
and questioned whether the Polo’s commitment to the values that underpinned the discourse of 
civil society was actually genuine. This issue, in particular, had been a recurrent theme for public 
debate especially since the assassination by the FARC of the eleven regional congressmen. Some 
had criticized the fact that the Polo kept neutrality towards the insurgency and enmity against the 
constitutional government.314 Others remarked that the Polo never straightforwardly condemned 
the FARC in the same way it did with paramilitaries. 315 One of the leaders of the Polo, after all, 
once declared that the Polo is “neither friend nor enemy of the FARC”.316 In a different occasion 
the President of the Party, Carlos Gaviria, said that the FARC carries out crimes but its members 
are not criminals. And finally, a regional leader of the Polo went as far as suggesting that 
“conflict” justifies the existence of the FARC.317 In conclusion, the debate that went on within 
                                                 
310 “Los organizadores de la marcha del 4 de febrero ratificaron que es contra las FARC,” El Tiempo, 
January 30, 2008. 
311 Amat, Yamid. “El País está cayendo en un peligroso ambiente de polarización,” El Tiempo, February 
3, 2008. 
312 Abad Faciolince, Héctor. “Sobre la marcha,” Semana, February 4, 2008. 
313 García Villegas, Mauricio. “Marchar sin advertencias,” El Tiempo, February, 5, 2008. 
314 “La crisis del Polo,” El Tiempo, September 16, 2007. 
315 Abad Faciolince, Héctor. “Izquierda y guerrilla,” Semana, December 12, 2005. 
316 “Los partidos y sus vínculos con grupos armados,” El Tiempo, September 14, 2007. 
317 “¿Ganó la linea Navarro-Petro sobre la Gaviria-Robledo-Dussán?”, Semana, September 24, 2007. 

 

275

the Colombian liberal camp systematically tested whether its members were coherently and 
therefore authentically committed to the principle of personal autonomy of the individual which 
demands that the individual be recognized irrespective of his or her proximity to some specific 
group that expresses a particularistic set of interests. This, in turn, enabled the members of the 
civil camp to undergo an important learning process as how the discourse of civil society should 
be adequately performed in public, which ended up serving the purpose of consolidation of that 
camp. 

The fact that the Colombian civil sphere maintained its deep fragmentation all along the 

debate over kidnapping does not imply that the Colombian civil sphere did not display any 
mechanism that would yield the generalization of the trauma of the kidnap victims across 
society. In principle, one might be tempted to believe that one way to restore complicity in a 
situation of “conflict without complicity” – to put it with Reed (2006) – is by recovering the 
profoundly human dimension of the suffering of the victims. In other words, - one might think - 
the experience of being human should be a universal anyone can relate to. And to support this 
point, one might invoke the narrative strategy CNN Correspondent Steve Nettleton or one major 
opinion-maker in Colombia, Salud Hernández, displayed with reference to kidnapping. In one of 
his pieces Nettleton, for example, describes the long lines wives, mothers, brothers and children 
of kidnap victims make outside the radio studio as they wait to address the microphone and send 
out to their beloved in captivity their messages of love and support. He observes that “twice a 
week, families of the kidnapped repeat this somber ritual at the Radio Nacional. The growing 
crowds of people who line the corridors rehearsing their comments are a testament to how in 
Colombia kidnapping has become an institution.” 318 Hernández, on the other hand, remarks in 
one of her op-ed pieces that Colombia is so plagued by so many different horrors that there will 
be no possible way to overcome them if people do not fix their gaze upon the face of the victims, 
on their tears, and on the tortures they underwent without acknowledging that both in mass 
graves and in the jungle there are and have been innocent victims who suffered. It is necessary – 
she says - to break the indifference and stop measuring pain quantitatively.319 

The problem with using the appeal to human experience as a strategy to bridge deep 

cultural difference is that it tends to naturalize it and therefore its sets it beyond culture. Surely, 
                                                 
318 Nettleton, Steve. “Kidnapped: pinned by the sword and the wall.” CNN, 
http://www.cnn.com/SPECIALS/2000/colombia/story/reports/kidnapped/index.html. 

 

276

the visceral dimension of human experience that is not mediated by language is probably close to 
a universal. Victims of torture around the world, after all, share a terrible secret irrespective of 
their cultural backgrounds. Most of human experience, however, is mediated by language and 
therefore by culture. Depending on the horizon of interpretation within which it unfolds, it will 
take different meanings. And sadly enough, the Colombian case is a clear witness to that. Salud 
Hernández herself admits that in Colombia different measures of pain get attached to different 
set of victims. FARC Chief Spokesman Raul Reyes, for example, refuses to talk about 
kidnapping. Rather he prefers to say that the FARC “retains” the rich and charges them with a 
“tax”: “When a person takes away something from another for a lucrative personal interest, this 
is kidnapping. But when taxes are levied for a political or a social goal or do the transformation 
of society, this is taxing. Those are simple taxes.” 320 

If human experience does not constitute a resource that can be automatically tapped into for 
the purpose of building cultural complicity across difference, then a fragmented civil sphere must 
resort to some alternative mechanism to generalize solidarity across the abysms that fracture it. 
The fact that in Colombia solidarity with the kidnap victims is on its way to get generalized 
means that such mechanisms have been eluding the theoretical lenses we have so far employed. 
In the next section I will address such a mechanism and show how in concrete it has operated 
within the Colombian context. 
 
Multivocal performances and the generalization of the trauma of the kidnap victims 
across the Colombian civil sphere  
 
Since the assassination of the eleven regional congressmen that shook Colombian public opinion 
and cracked the traditional wall of indifference towards the kidnap victims, three events seem to 
have been pivotal to awake – as an observer puts it - “a generalized feeling of indignation and 
rejection”,321 thereby contributing to generalize solidarity with the victims across Colombian 
society: Professor Moncayo’s 600 miles march to Bogota to demand the liberation of his son; the 
image of Ingrid Betancourt in a video the FARC circulated to prove her survival; and the story of 
                                                                                                                                                             
319 Hernández Mora, Salud, “Con licencia de juzgar,” El Tiempo, January 20, 2008. 
320 Nettleton, Steve. “Kidnapped: pinned by the sword and the wall.” CNN, 
http://www.cnn.com/SPECIALS/2000/colombia/story/reports/kidnapped/index.html. 
321 Pombo, Mauricio. “Dolor de carne y hueso,” El Tiempo, December 6, 2007. 

 

277

Emmanuel, a three-year old boy that was born in captivity from a kidnap victim and a FARC 
combatant. 

These three cases engage into a rather complex and possibly paradoxical exercise of 

cultural juggling. They are both about the celebration of civil heroism and human dignity and 
about the vindication of traditional values. Gustavo Moncayo turns into a national symbol of 
civil protest but at the same time he manages to walk that fine line within the Christian tradition 
that enables the humble – the peon - to rise and partake into the glory of Jesus. Ingrid, on her 
part, becomes a living indictment against political repression and civil indifference but 
simultaneously her iconic appearance in the video transfigures her into a Virgin Mary, a sign of 
the possibility of social unity through the common experience of pain. A journalist remarks that 
her image in the video bears “something of the Piety of Michelangelo, aesthetically beautiful, 
and humanly violent and tragic.”322 Finally, Emmanuel rises as a symbol of the shamelessness of 
anti-democratic forces which are capable of denying the most basic rights of the weakest in 
society but at the same time he also comes to play the role of Baby Jesus who will descend at 
Christmas on a divided Colombia and contribute to bring it back together.  

All three cases are multivocal performances that unfold along the fault line between the 

two discursive camps that make up the Colombian civil sphere: the discourse of civil society and 
the discourse of the hacienda. As such, they function as revolving doors that make it possible to 
zip together the calls for solidarity with the kidnap victims that each side manages to articulate 
on its own terms. Giving a closer look to such peculiar cultural phenomena may provide useful 
insights into the mechanism by which a civil sphere can still build generalized solidarity ties 
across society despite its fragmentation. For the purpose of this exercise, I will here focus upon 
the march of Professor Moncayo. 

Gustavo Moncayo is a 55-year old high school teacher from a southern region of Colombia. 
His son – Pablo Emilio, a corporal of the National Police - was kidnapped in December 1997 by 
the FARC after an attack against the police station where he was serving. In October 2006 the 
FARC exploded a car bomb within the parking lot of the Military University in Bogota and 
President Uribe decided to close the door to any humanitarian exchange with the guerrilla group. 
At that point Gustavo started to publicly wear chains at his wrists and neck, like the kidnap 
                                                 
322 Pombo, Mauricio. “Dolor de carne y hueso.” El Tiempo, December 6, 2007. 

 

278

victims of the FARC, and never stopped ever since. 323 In July 2007 in the aftermath of the 
assassination by the FARC of the eleven regional congressmen, out of despair and fearing he 
might no longer see his son alive, he decided to leave his home together with one of his 
daughters and head on foot to Bogota to protest for the release of his son. He started his march in 
the middle of a generalized neglect and without support of any institution – social, political, 
religious or economic.324 But then he managed to catch public attention. The media would 
accompany him along the track. People impatiently awaited his arrival. They applauded him, 
hugged him, touched him, took photos with him, asked for autographs, dedicated local folk songs 
to him, donated money, and offered food. In a society that is marked by severe socioeconomic 
segregation, his march moved people from all strata. In one occasion – Moncayo remembers - an 
armored BMW stopped, a man came out, took a photo with him and left. Moncayo tells that the 
man did not dare give him a lift. He knew that Gustavo was walking for his son. 325 Towards the 
end of his march, his arrival was announced on the radio and schools would stop their classes.326 
The march lasted forty-six days. Even the FARC acknowledged that his gesture was “valiant”.327 
When he got to Bogotá, Moncayo met with the President and the Mayor of the city. At the end of 
2007 he was awarded the National Piece Prize.328 Though his painful march did not manage to 
obtain the liberation of his son, he managed most of times to command the attention and the 
solidarity of broad and diverse segments of the Colombian society.  

CNN correspondent, Steve Nettleton, described Moncayo as a national Forrest Gump. I 

would argue, however, that the parallel hides more than it actually reveals. Surely, what 
immediately comes to mind when one observes Moncayo’s action is its civil vocation. It is a 
statement about the civil value of peaceful protest. It is a declaration of belief in the capability of 
the individual to make a difference. It is a reminder about the duty citizens have to take a stance 
on public issues and act. It is a promise that in a divided society civil rituals can bring together 
people from all regions, all ethnicities, and all socio-economic strata. And it is the vindication 
that civil society can play a role in public life, as an activist who marched along with Moncayo 
                                                 
323 “La procesión de un padre,” Semana, June 25, 2007. 
324 “El episodio de Uribe y Moncayo: Pueblo vs. Pueblo,” El Tiempo, August 13, 2007. 
325 Navia, José. “Moncayo paralizó todo a su paso,” El Tiempo, August 2, 2007. 
326 Miño Rueda, Luis Alberto. “Moncayo, de maestro de geografía a ídolo nacional,” El Tiempo, July 22, 
2007. 
327 “FARC elogian a Moncayo. No responden sobre su hijo,” El Tiempo, August 14, 2007. 

 

279

pointed out.329 Moncayo’s march, in a way, performs a similar function to being on a campaign 
track for a political candidate. It transforms a private individual into a public figure by exposing 
the individual to public problems and by committing him or her before multiple publics to take 
them into account. An observer remarks that “Citizen Moncayo” turned into the symbolic 
transfiguration of the people.330 He interpreted the people and rose because of the people. And he 
did all this by showing dignity.331  

Still, looking at Moncayo in purely civil terms will not capture all that he really meant to 
Colombian society. Moncayo was not only the citizen. He was also the peón who managed to 
walk along that fine line within the Christian tradition that allows the humble to rise and partake 
into the glory of Jesus. Turner (1973) would say that the life of Jesus served as the archetypical 
metaphor for the performance Moncayo carried out. 

Moncayo showed from the start to be a man of faith. When he left home, his daughter 

warned him they had no money. He reassured her. Along the way they would encounter good 
people. 332 Like Jesus, he started to have followers who would march with him.333 Public opinion 
would soon refer to them as “the legion” or “the disciples”.334 Ingrid Betancour once said in a 
letter to her mother: “We live like dead”.335 To resurrect his son and all kidnap victims from 
their death in the jungle, he needed to carry out a ritual of collective purification by walking the 
same via crucis Jesus did in his Passion.  The media actually recognized his march as such.336 
Like Christ, he would suffer along the way. And the media dwelt on his bleeding feet337 As 
Moncayo entered innumerable villages along the way, people came to the street to see him. 
Some knelt. Other blessed him and raised their arms to the sky: “The entire world is moved.”338 
                                                                                                                                                             
328 “Gustavo Moncayo, ganador del premio Nacional de Paz, dice que prefiere la libertad de su hijo,” El 
Tiempo, December 5, 2007. 
329 “Día 8: El profesor Gustavo Moncayo llegó a Popayán en su recorrido por el acuerdo humanitario,” El 
Tiempo, June 25, 2007. 
330 “El episodio de Uribe y Moncayo: Pueblo vs. Pueblo,” El Tiempo, August 13, 2007. 
331 “El episodio de Uribe y Moncayo: Pueblo vs. Pueblo,” El Tiempo, August 13, 2007. 
332 “Día 8: El profesor Gustavo Moncayo llegó a Popayán en su recorrido por el acuerdo humanitario,” El 
Tiempo, June 25, 2007. 
333 Miño Rueda, Luis Alberto. “Moncayo, de maestro de geografía a ídolo nacional,” El Tiempo, July 22, 
2007. 
334 Arbaláez, Jotamario. “Viaje a pie,” El Tiempo, August 1, 2007. 
335 Ochoa, Luis Noé. “Carta a Ingrid,” El Tiempo, April 5, 2008. 
336 “La procesión de un padre,” Semana, June 25, 2007. 
337 Gonzáles Posso, Camilo. “El caminante por la libertad,” El Tiempo, August 2, 2007. 
338 Arbaláez, Jotamario. “Viaje a pie,” El Tiempo, August 1, 2007. 

 

280

Children approached him and gave him flowers.339 Orphans and elderly alike came to him and
 
340 A woman once implored him to enter her home. Her husband had been ill for a 
greeted him.
month. She asked him to touch him and see if he could do a miracle. “Moncayo stopped and the 
 
husband was already walking towards him.” He told the man to put some water on his knees and
ng the 
to have faith because God helps everyone. Then, he went back to the road and marched alo
multitude.341 The encounter with President Uribe under a tent in Bolivar Square where he finally 
settled at the end of his march once again evokes parts of the script of the Passion of Christ. To 
the President who resisted a humanitarian exchange with the FARC, Moncayo says: “You’re not 
the owner of life”.342 As a journalist puts it, “the President insults, and the people do not give in. 
The President humiliates, and the people will look down. The President invites a fight, and the 
people will hide.” 343 Moncayo lends his chick before a President who loses his patience and 
raises his voice and before the President’s advisors who arrogantly accuse him of simple-
mindedness. Before a President who is insensitive to human dignity – says an observer - 
Moncayo vindicates the reason of humanity and, by doing so, through his pain, his impotence, 
his own dignity, Moncayo vindicates the outraged dignity of the public.344 The media would 
conclude that the ritual of humiliation against Moncayo ended up showing a President that 
cannot accept a horizontal encounter with the people. 345 

One may ask at this point who is really Gustavo Moncayo? A civil hero or a traditional 

saint? What is interesting about his performance, is that we have no way of resolving the enigna. 
He is both and yet does not completely fulfil our expectations about either of them. From a civil 
perspective there are elements about his performance that clearly do no fit in. How could a civil 
hero, after all, enter the home of that woman and address her sick husband that way? The same 
conclusion could also reach by approaching Moncayo’s performance through the lenses of the 
discourse of the hacienda. In one occasion the “peace walker” says: “I am neither a hero nor a 
saint, just a man who got tired of so many humiliations and hit the road to seek the liberation of 
                                                
339 Navia, José. “Moncayo paralizó todo a su paso,” El Tiempo, August 2, 2007. 
340 Miño, Luis Alberto. “Nooooooooo,” El Tiempo, July 16, 2007. 
341 Miño Rueda, Luis Alberto. “Moncayo, de maestro de geografía a ídolo nacional,” El Tiempo, July 22, 
2007. 
342 Forero, Juan. “After a long trek across Colombia, hostage advocate not ready to rest,” Washington 
Post Foreign Service, August 24, 2007, Page A01. 
343 “El episodio de Uribe y Moncayo: Pueblo vs. Pueblo,” El Tiempo, August 13, 2007. 
344 Benedetti Jimeno, Armando. “Rincón Caribe al fin apareció un Moncayo,” El Tiempo, August 6, 2007. 
345 “El episodio de Uribe y Moncayo: Pueblo vs. Pueblo,” El Tiempo, August 13, 2007. 

 

 

281

his son and all other kidnap victims.346 Now, each mismatch – and therefore each slight defusion 
- on each side of Moncayo’s enigmatic performance feeds into the authenticity of the other side. 

If authenticity in a multivocal performance involves some defusion of the elements that 
make up each side of it, it is therefore legitimate to wonder how one can then distinguish an 
authentic performance from an inauthentic one. Will the latter involve more defusion or rather a 
different form of defusion? In other words, is it a quantitative matter of degree or a qualitative 
difference in form? Although the development of a cultural pragmatics to deal with multivocal 
performances is not possible given the limited objectives of this paper, still it is worth referring 
back to Moncayo’s march to refer some of the factors that seem to have contributed to 
undermine the authenticity of his performance. 

Towards the end Moncayo’s action started to lose part of its initial effectiveness. Two 
issues, in particular, seem to have been influential in this respect. First, to start talks over a 
humanitarian exchange conducive to the liberation of the kidnap victims, the FARC had 
demanded that the government demilitarized the territory of two municipalities in a southern 
region of Colombia. As his march progressed, Moncayo increasingly insisted that the 
government should go along with such a demand. The FARC publicly saluted his insistence and 
observed that “as his march was continuing, the need and urgency of a humanitarian exchange 
advanced in the conscience of Colombians.”347 In an open letter to Moncayo an opinion-maker 
warned him that, by invoking the humanitarian exchange under the conditions dictated by the 
guerrilla, he was turning into a tactical asset of the FARC, which would throw a bleak shadow 
onto his march. After all, that would undermine the meaning his march had acquired, which 
crucially depended on its being “pristine and pure, foreign to any kind of ideological taint that 
would profane” it.348 Now, from a civil standpoint it would be unacceptable that the march 
turned into something that could help the FARC. And from a more traditional point of view, it 
would be unacceptable that the sacred ritual of the via crucis be turned into a tactical weapon in 
the hands of ‘the bandits’. 

One second element also latently threatened the effectiveness of Moncayo’s multivocal 

performance. It had more or less directly to do with his arrival at Bogota and his decision to set 
                                                 
346 Miño Rueda, Luis Alberto. “Moncayo, de maestro de geografía a ídolo nacional,” El Tiempo, July 22, 
2007. 
347 “FARC elogian a Moncayo. No responden sobre su hijo,” El Tiempo, August 14, 2007. 
348 Hernández Bolivar, Saul. “En el lugar equivocado. Al profesor Moncayo,” El Tiempo, August 7, 2007. 

 

282

his tent in Bolivar Square where the Colombian Congress, the Town-hall, the Cathedral, the 
Constitutional Court and, not too far, the Presidential Palace converge. Quite curiously, such a 
mis-en-scene exposed Moncayo to a space that – symbolically speaking – had an inherent 
potential for contamination and this is a risk neither a saint nor a civil hero can afford to run. 
Their aura, after all, crucially depends upon a perception of disinterestedness that will be badly 
spoiled by the lures of political power.349 

In the light of these two factors that seemed to influence the authenticity of Moncayo’s 

performance, one may at least formulate the following conjecture. Both authenticity and 
inauthenticity in a multivocal performance involve some defusion of the elements that make up 
each side of it. However, there is a qualitative difference between the two. In the former case, as 
I earlier suggested, each side experiences some level of defusion due to the percolation into one 
side of elements that fit instead into the other side. On the other hand, in an inauthentic 
multivocal performance defusion is caused by the presence of elements that do not fit into either 
side. It will be up to future research on the cultural pragmatics of social interactions under 
“conflict without complicity” to pin down the grammar of authenticity under such circumstances. 

Addressing the question of authenticity in multivocal performances is also crucial for 

another reason. It makes us aware of the fact that their contribution to the articulation of 
generalized solidarities across a fragmented civil sphere is a much more contingent and fragile 
cultural accomplishment than it would otherwise happen with a regular type of performance. For 
this reason the consolidation of generalized solidarities under such circumstances must call for 
an effective, sustained, and systematic presence of these performances in social life. 
 
Conclusion 
 
For a long time Colombian society has not regarded kidnapping as a national trauma. Lately, 
however, things have been changing. In this paper I have suggested that addressing the 
generalization of trauma across a fragmented civil, like the Colombian one, can be particularly 
fruitful in terms of theory-building. 
                                                 
349 Castillo Cardona, Carlos. “Golpe de estado,” El Tiempo, August 8, 2007; Ochoa, Luis Noé, “La plaza 
de Moncayo,” El Tiempo, August 4, 2007. 
 

 

283

In his theory of cultural trauma, and more generally in his theory of the civil sphere, 

Alexander suggests that, to generalize trauma, and therefore to establish far-reaching solidarity 
ties between the victims and the rest of society, advocates must tap into the discourse of civil 
society and articulate a grand narrative that can translate the pain of the victims into the pain of 
all. There are societies, however, that do not exclusively rely upon such discourse for the purpose 
of establishing generalized solidarities. Alexander’s theory of the civil sphere does not take stock 
with such situations that, as Reed (2006) would put it, entail “conflict without complicity”. As a 
result, his theory does not address the actual mechanics by which a fragmented civil sphere can 
still yield generalized forms of solidarity. In this paper I have suggested that the ongoing process 
of generalization of the trauma of the kidnap victims in Colombia shows that multivocal 
performances along the fault line that breaks the Colombian civil sphere into two distinct 
discursive zones constitute the elusive mechanism by which generalized solidarities can still 
emerge across a plurality of social groups that appeal to different discourses to sustain solidarity 
among their own members. This finding – I have argued – may contribute to extend Alexander’s 
theory of the civil sphere and, by implication, his theory of cultural trauma.  

I have also suggested that bringing multivocal performances into the analysis has two 

unexpected theoretical implications. Effective multivocal performances display an enigmatic 
Mona Lisa-type of authenticity that exceeds the analytical correspondence Alexander establishes 
in his cultural pragmatics between the notions of authenticity/inauthenticity and those of 
fusion/defusion. Also, they yield a distinct type of cultural reenchantment that has curiously 
escaped the analytical lenses of neo-Durkheimian sociology. The former point entails that an 
extension of Alexander’s theory of the civil sphere inherently calls for a theoretical extension of 
his cultural pragmatics while the latter suggests that the horizon of enquiry of the neo-
Durkheimian tradition within contemporary sociological theory might be even broader than 
imagined in the past three decades. As Smith and Alexander (2005) have recently remarked, in 
the 1980s a neo-Durkheimian tradition emerged within sociology. It gained momentum in the 
1990s and in the course of the past three decades it has generated a broad range of fresh insights 
into multiple spheres of social life such as war and violence, national symbols, criminal law and 
punishment, race and ethnicity, technology and environmentalism, money and economic life, 
democratic transitions, democratic legitimacy, cultural trauma and collective memory. In 2006 
Reed published an essay titled “Social Dramas, Shipwrecks and Cockfights: Three Types of 

 

284

Social Performance” whose far-reaching theoretical implications upon the horizon of enquiry of 
neo-Durkheimian cultural sociology have not been systematically worked out, yet. My paper 
attempts to take one first step in that direction by opening up a narrow window upon the new 
terrain of enquiry that may face scholars as they take stock with the phenomenon of “conflict 
without complicity” in social life. In short, as neo-Durkheimian cultural sociology did in the 
past, it can once again enhance our understanding of war and violence, national symbols, 
criminal law and punishment, race and ethnicity, technology and environmentalism, money and 
economic life, democratic transitions, democratic legitimacy, cultural trauma and collective 
memory. Only this time, it may do so by exploring “conflict without complicity” within each of 
the above-mentioned areas. 

To conclude, I would like to acknowledge my intellectual debt to Padget and Ansell’s 1993 

award-winning article for their notion of multivocal action which inspired my analysis of 
multivocal performances. In their paper the authors lay out a theory about the structural and 
cultural factors that underlie the centralization of power in processes of state formation. In 
particular, they suggest that Cosimo de Medici managed to become the political pivot of 
Renaissance Florence thanks to two factors – one structural and the other cultural. More 
precisely, his structural position within Florentine society enabled him to engage into separate 
exchanges with the aristocrats, the merchants and the populace. And his enigmatic sphinx-like 
posture allowed him to obtain their support because he did not come across as exclusively 
committed to the particularistic interests of any of them. His action – Padget and Ansell point out 
– was inherently multivocal and this crucially contributed to the transfiguration of Cosimo de 
Medici within the Florentine political scene into a quintessentially public figure. In their article 
Padget and Ansell do not elaborate any further on the specifics of multivocal action or on its 
broader theoretical implications. Nor does McClean (1998) dwell on it, despite his more direct 
focus on the cultural side of their analysis. By building upon Padget and Ansell’s intuition about 
the relation between multivocal action and the construction of publicity, I have tried to suggest 
that an encounter between their research tradition and neo-Durkhemian cultural sociology may 
result into handsome gains from trade for both. On the one hand, neo-Durkhemians can build 
upon such intuition for the purpose of extending their theory of the civil sphere. And on the 
other, complexity theorists may draw from neo-Durkhemian cultural sociology a clearer picture 
of the cultural specifics of multivocal action and of its broader theoretical implications.  

 

285

 
 
 
Bibliographical references 
 
Alexander, Jeffrey. 2003. The meaning of social life. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Alexander, Jeffrey. 2004. “Towards a Theory of Cultural Trauma.” Pp. 1-30 in Cultural trauma, edited by 

Alexander et al. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Alexander, Jeffrey. 2006. The Civil Sphere. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Alexander,  Jeffrey.  2006.  “Cultural  pragmatics:  social  performance  between  ritual  and  strategy”,  in  J. 
Alexander, B. Giesen,  and J. Mast (eds.) Social performance. Cambridge: Cambridge  University 
Press. 

Alexander, Jeffrey and Smith, Philip. 1993. “The Discourse of American Civil Society: A New Proposal 

for Cultural Studies.” Theory and Society Vol. 22(2), pp. 151-207. 

Baiocchi, Gianpaolo. 2006. “The Civilizing Forces of Social Movements: Corporate and Liberal Codes in 

Brazil’s Public Sphere.” Sociological Theory Vol. 24(4), pp. 285-311. 

Cuellar, Sebastián. 2009. Legitimando la guerra en Colombia: A Propósito de sus lógicas culturales. 

Master Thesis, Department of Sociology, National University of Colombia, Bogotá. 

Estrada Gallego, Fernando. 2004. Las metáforas de una guerra perpetua. Estudios sobre pragmática del 

discurso en el conflicto armado colombiano. Medellín: Editorial Universidad EAFIT. 

Gutérrez de Pineda, Virginia. 1992. Honor, familia y sociedad en la estructura patriarcal, Bogotá: 

Universidad Nacional de Colombia. 

McClean, Paul. 1998. “A frame analysis of favor seeking in the Renaissance : Agency, networks, and 

political culture,” American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 104(1), pp. 51-91.  

Morales, Jorge. 1998. “Mestizaje, malicia indígena y viveza en la construcción del carácter nacional.” 

Revista de Estudios Sociales No.1, pp. 39-43. 

Padget, John and Ansell, Christopher. 1993. “Robust action and the rise of the Medicis, 1400-1432,” 

American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 98(6), pp. 1259-1319. 

Palacios, Marco. 1999. “Agenda para la democracia y negociación con las guerrillas.” In Francisco Leal 

Buitrago, ed. Los laberintos de la guerra. Bogotá: Tercer Mundo Editores. 

Reed, Isaac. 2006. “Social Dramas, Shipwrecks and Cockfights: Three Types of Social Performance,” in 
J. Alexander, B. Giesen, and J. Mast (eds.) Social performance. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Rorty, Richard. 1989. Contingency, Irony and Solidarity. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Smith,  Philip  and  Jeffrey  Alexander.  2005.  “Introduction:  the  New  Durkheim.”  In  The  Cambridge 
Companion  to  Durkheim,  ed.  by  Jeffrey  C.  Alexander  and  Philip  Smith.  Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 1-37. 

Tognato, Carlo and Cuellar, Sebastian. 2009. “Military ‘Shipwrecks’: Legitimizing War in a Fragmented 

Civil Sphere.” Mimeo, Department of Sociology, National University of Colombia, Bogota. 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

286

 

 

 

Narrating Cultural Trauma of Defeat in Postwar Japan
 

DRAFT:  
Yale Trauma Workshop, Athens, June 2009 
Akiko Hashimoto  
Department of Sociology
University of Pittsburgh   
Over the past decades, the trauma of war and defeat in Japan has been recounted in many 
voices from a broad spectrum of perspectives. From personal accounts to commemorative 
speeches, and from media dramatizations to public controversies, the official and unofficial 
narratives of war and defeat have been inescapably present in national collective life. 
During this time, social groups of different persuasions have contended over the master 
narratives of the Asia‐Pacific War. These groups – consisting of politicians, intellectuals, 
teachers, bureaucrats, business leaders, media entrepreneurs, labor activists, and students, 
who were themselves veterans, returnees, bereaved families, orphans, atomic bomb 
survivors, ethnic minorities, and so on – forged different narratives to interpret what the war 
meant and what went wrong. Their narratives used different moral frames: some 
universalized the war and the atrocities (“All wars are bad”), while others relativized them 
(“We were bad, but they were bad too”), or condemned it (“We started an atrocious, reckless 
war”), and still others sought to triumph over the defeat (“Defeat was the harbinger of 
peace.”) Within these frames, individuals staked out different positions: victims of a brutal 
war (“We all suffered and paid heavily”); victimizers in an imperial war (“We wrought so 
much suffering in Asia”); the repentant who vowed never to make the same mistakes again 
(“No more war! No more Hiroshima!”). At the same time, many also remained silent, 
preferring to bury their own memory, or conceal their post‐traumatic stress disorder. 

 

287

Over the course of the decades, the narratives of the national trauma coalesced into 
two broad directions that cultural trauma theory would propose (Alexander et al 2004). The 
progressive narrative of amelioration is recognizable in the “bedrock of peace” discourse 
(heiwa no ishizue) that represents the vision that defeat is the reason why Japan enjoys peace 
and material prosperity today. This “fortunate fall” argument is used often in official speeches 
and commemorations, justifying and legitimating the sacrifices of the war dead, while at the 
same time, diverting attention away from the culpability of the state in starting and losing the 
war. The focus on assigning positive value to the personal sacrifices of the dead invokes an 
inescapable sense of indebtedness to them, while bracketing out the question of whether the 
war was fought for a legitimate cause. Thus, as long as those soldiers’ and civilians’ sacrifices 
are emphasized, the narrative frame is elastic enough to allow the war itself to be either 
condemned or ennobled. The rationale that the destruction was somehow a necessary 
condition to attain fruitful ends is a strained logic to be sure, but it nevertheless satisfies the 
strong desire for elevating and dignifying a colossal failure.  
By contrast, the tragic narrative represents identification with suffering victims. In this 
narrative frame, the war wrought unimaginable tragedy to the people who had to “bear the 
unbearable and suffer the insufferable.” The scale of violence and destruction in the total war 
is undisputable, and the only appropriate response as a nation is to make sure it will not 
happen again. Thus, those who were affected by this tragedy are duty bound to recount, warn, 
and prevent repeating the mistake. The war was wrong, but there is also sufficient elasticity 
here in assigning the blame to different agents and causes, from the Emperor and colonial 
aggression, to incompetent military strategists and self‐serving Western powers. This 
narrative is often recognized as the “ravages of war” discourse (sensô no sanka) that sets a 

 

288

premium on Japan’s victimization in Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and indiscriminate air raids, and 
tends to cast war as an absolute evil. 
In broad strokes, these narratives have helped to normalize the national trauma in the 
national consciousness, and over time, they have infused the Japanese collective identity with 
strong anti‐war sentiments. These narratives have helped legitimate the sentiments of the 
“peaceful nation” discourse (heiwa kokka) that is based on Article 9 (the constitutional clause 
on the renunciation of war), and have served as a common platform for the nation – for the 
political left and right, from official discourse to kitchen talk, and across generations. This 
discourse of the peaceful nation strategically directs the search for new identity toward the 
future, not the past. A future‐oriented identity discourse, then, effectively blurs moral 
categories and blunts moral judgments about the past events.  
Past studies of Japan’s war memory have often described the phenomenon in terms 
of its political conditions such as the left/right divide, or in essentialist terms such as 
shame/guilt cultures. Cultural trauma theory, however, by articulating the structure of 
discursive systems that emerge to normalize the cultural trauma in collective life, helps 
capture the complexity inherent in Japan’s national experience that is not explained by the 
reductionistic, one‐dimensional analyses. One such phenomenon that I explore in this 
paper is the response to the problem of public trust and national belonging after the total 
defeat. How could state power be trusted when it had let its people down badly, leading 
them to a disastrous war in a totalitarian society that repressed, censored, and destroyed 
individual lives? How could fellow citizens be trusted when they had supported 
enthusiastically or acquiesced meekly to the reckless Imperial ambitions? How could the 

 

289

new democratic order be trusted when it was forced upon a people by their former 
enemies? 
I argue that responses to this problem in Japan have bifurcated into progressive and 
tragic narratives of the war over time, and have influenced the formation of collective 
identity in postwar society. I also explore the social impact of this long‐standing bifurcation 
which still yields no consensus today, and consider its role in blocking empathy for Asian 
victims beyond national borders. 
 THE NATIONAL TRAUMA OF WAR IN THE JAPANESE CASE  
 A cultural trauma occurs “when members of a collective feel they have been subjected to a 
horrendous event that leaves indelible marks upon their group consciousness, marking 
their memories forever and changing their future identity in fundamental and irrevocable 
ways” (Alexander 2004, 1).  To fathom the scale of this “horrendous event” a brief outline 
of the scope of deaths inflicted in this case is in order. The total death toll of World War II is 
estimated at 60 million, of which one‐third occurred in Asia (Weinberg 2005). During the 
Japanese invasions, from China to Indonesia, the Philippines and New Guinea, it is 
estimated that 20 million Asians died, not only from warfare but from civilian raids, 
plunder, rape, starvation, and torture (Fujiwara 2001). In Japan, civilian death – from the 
atomic bombing of Hiroshima, Nagasaki to air raids in numerous cities – totaled 
approximately 1 million. In China, the civilian death toll is said to be around 16 million. In 
the United States, total civilian dead was less than 2,000. In the Japanese military, one in 
every three soldiers died out of 6 million who were mobilized. The death rate (38%, 2.3 
million dead) was higher than that of German soldiers (33%), and 19 times that of 

 

290

American soldiers (2%)(Yui 2005, 261). Because Japanese soldiers fought across the vast 
expanse of the Asia‐Pacific region from North China to the South Pacific where supply lines 
were broken off especially toward the end of the war, approximately 60‐70% of them died 
not from warfare but from starvation, disease, and abandonment. To date, only half of their 
remains have been repatriated, while the rest remain scattered throughout the far reaches 
of the region. Given the prohibition on surrender, a relatively small percentage was taken 
prisoner, and the last of them returned in 1956. The repatriation of several million civilians 
and ex‐soldiers took decades. 
After unconditional surrender the U.S. Occupation (1945‐52) followed, during which 
time the war crimes trials (The Tokyo Trial 1946‐48; Class B and C war crimes trials 1946‐51) 
punished mostly military men for the most egregious violation of war conventions.  Nearly 
6,000 men were prosecuted for war crimes, and almost 4,500 of them were convicted; 
twelve were executed as Class A war criminals, and 920 were executed as Class B and C 
war criminals. The Occupation also implemented blanket social, economic, and political 
reforms that amounted to a total inversion of the moral order, scrapping the social 
institutions of the totalitarian militarist state and its Shito ideology, and replacing them with 
Imperial democracy and liberal social reforms (Dower 1999).  
THE CULTURAL TRAUMA OF DEFEAT AND ITS NARRATIVES OF COLLECTIVE IDENT
ITY 
For Japan, defining a national identity over the past decades has been a difficult and 
challenging undertaking following the trauma of war, defeat, and foreign occupation. The 
country’s attempts to re‐establish a collective identity after such radical shifts in the social 
and moral order provoked urgent questions of trust and suspicion toward the discredited 

 

 

291

state authority and the political culture that wrought those traumatic failures. Trust, 
suspicion and betrayal became important political moral emotions that underpinned the 
question of solidarity to build new social institutions and define a new collective identity 
after the disintegration of prewar society. Dirk Moses (2007b, 56) has argued in the case of 
Germany that only two options exist in such a case: people could either rally to defend the 
national culture or seek to renovate it. Japan faced a similar choice to facilitate its collective 
regeneration. Whether or not people were willing to invest their hope and fate again in the 
Japanese power elite to face the unpredictable changes proved to be the core ingredient 
that would shape the contours of political identity in subsequent years and decades.  
Out of this process, there emerged two broad approaches for individuals to re‐
establish their relationship with state power. On the one hand there were those who 
emerged from the experience of social collapse with their sense of trust and belief in the 
nation more or less intact, who could still trust state leadership to guide the nation toward 
recovery with some sense of confidence. Others emerged embittered by the failures of 
Japan’s wartime political authority with a sense of profound misgivings for the nation and 
sought to distance themselves from it. For them, defeat was an experience of liberation 
from the oppressive totalitarian state and authoritarian culture, and hence it made sense 
that they sought to rebuild a collective identity that was, in a sense, less absorbed in the 
“we” of the nation state.350  
People thus responded differently according to their confidence in the nation’s 
ability to move in the right direction, with some level of stability and predictability. This 
difference has come to characterize a great deal of postwar political culture, and it is today 

 

292

evident in the opposing viewpoints on revising the peace constitution to allow greater 
options for the state to deploy the military, or on mandating patriotic education in public 
schools. In terms of cultural trauma theory, those two narratives differ in the symbolic 
weighting of pollution assigned to state power (Alexander 2004). One sees state authority 
as reliably promoting better life, and building stable social bonds and institutions. The 
other sees it as pursuing self‐serving interests at the people’s expense.  While assuming 
different forms over the past decades, the opposition between trust and distrust continues 
to mark a deep social divide today.  It ultimately represents alternate ways of giving 
meaning to citizenship and to maintaining group identity (Eyerman 2004). 
These two broad orientations are associated with different levels of ontological 
security, and over time, they fashioned general narratives of trauma that I call “Bedrock of 
Peace” and “Ravages of War” narratives, which I outline below. Although they characterize 
general trends in right/left divides, they nevertheless do not classify neatly into those 
conventional categories. As Moses (2007b) showed in the case of Germany, the political 
emotions of trust in the state and political culture do not fit or coincide exactly with the 
conservative‐progressive divide. For example, leading LDP statesmen of the wartime 
generation like Miyazawa Kiichi and Gotôda Masaharu staunchly defended the peace 
constitution throughout their long political careers. Likewise in the media, the national 
newspaper Yomiuri shinbun, usually a reliable supporter of the conservative LDP 
government, spearheaded the discourse on the culpability of wartime state leadership in a 
high profile project in the 2000s (Yomiuri Shinbun 2006a, 2006b). Thus the landscape of 
war memory is not always shaped according to political party lines.  
350 My discussion here draws on Dirk Moses’ analysis of the German case in his German Intellectuals and the 

                                                                                                                                                            
 

 

293

 THE PROGRESSIVE NARRATIVES ON THE ‘BEDROCK OF PEACE’ 
As scholars have pointed out, the desire to search for positive meaning after defeat 
in war through in a progressive narrative is often very powerful (Schivelbusch 2003; 
MacLeod 2008; Smith 2005). There are many examples of the urge to generate positive 
meaning in the aftermath of defeat in modern history, from the myth of the Lost Cause for 
the American Confederacy after the Civil War to the myth of the Fallen Soldier for German 
soldiers who died in World War I. The need to find redeeming worth in mass death is 
exceedingly powerful also among victors, as the well‐known British rationalization of 
World War I as ‘the war to end all wars’ attests. Win or lose, with the benefit of hindsight, 
people have often strained contradictory logic to find ‘meaning’ in tragic slaughters, 
attempting to reconcile the violence with virtue: ‘the soldiers killed to free people,’ ‘the 
bomb was dropped to save lives,’ ‘the war dead have brought peace,’ ‘the soldiers died to 
protect the future’ and so on.   
Japan’s attempts to turn national failure into motivation for building a better future 
started immediately after the war in the 1940s as part of the efforts to come to terms with 
the enormity of its war dead. For example, public intellectuals like Nanbara Shigeru vowed 
in his tribute to the fallen that they had not died in vain as they would serve as the 
foundation upon which peace would be built in the future (Dower 1999, 489).  Anxieties 
about the futility of sacrifice for the state are often subsumed in a narrative of hope called 
“the bedrock of peace” which has played a key role in reconstructing the meaning for the 
deaths and devastation in the collective imagination. By blending together narratives of 
Nazi Past, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2007 

                                                                                                                                                            
 

 

294

tragedy and messages for peace, defeat can be made a palatable experience, like the 
fortunate fall where destruction is supposedly instrumental to bringing about something 
good. The deaths of those men were worthwhile because they prevented a situation that 
could have been worse. They did not die in vain, because their death enabled the defeat 
which ended the atrocious violence. Regardless of where and how they died, this narrative 
allows their deaths to be redefined as an act of courage, while relieving the guilt of the 
living. Japan’s enormous attachment to the valor of the fallen has to be understood in this 
light (Takahashi 2005). 
A discourse explicitly linking acts of sacrifice to achieving peace in a formula of 
national “progress” started to gain traction in national commemorations and national 
newspaper editorials in the 1960s, at a time that the ruling party LDP consolidated power 
and claimed to guide Japan toward “prosperity and affluence” that would ultimately make 
it the second largest economy in the world (Akazawa 2005; Nakano 2005).  The 
understanding of “progress” here referred to a range of ideas: peace, prosperity, 
democracy, justice, and security that seemed to be preconditions for a society aspiring to a 
high standard of living without a state of war (Gluck 1993, 93; Igarashi 2000, 130‐9). With 
such a broad and elastic definition of progress, the ameliorative narratives helped to unite, 
energize and integrate the populace in a time of rapid uncertain social change; they also 
suggested reassuringly that loyal sacrifice for the “greater good”– such as the national‐state 
or a business corporation – would be amply rewarded.  

 

Discourse of ‘Meaningful Sacrifice’: The Case of Battleship Yamato 

 

295

Modernity has been characterized by the emergence of nation‐states that can 
mobilize the passion of young men to die for the country on a massive scale (Anderson 
1991). By mobilizing nationalist passion, a conscripted soldier in a modern war can believe 
“he is dying for something greater than himself, for something that will outlast his 
individual, perishable life in place of a greater, eternal vitality” (Rahimi 2006). If the 
tension between recognizing the violent destruction of war and seeking constructive 
meaning in mass death has remained virtually irreconcilable – especially in total wars that 
called up ordinary conscripts by the millions for the first time in modern history – it is 
especially acute for the vanquished who are haunted by military failure (Mosse 1990).  
One of the best‐known examples of discourse on sacrifice for the “greater good” in 
Japan is the story of battleship Yamato and its 3,000 crew who died in the sea southwest of 
Japan. This patriotic tale recounts the last moments of those navy men in the largest 
battleship ever built, used for a tactically meaningless suicide sortie only months before the 
defeat. One of its survivors Yoshida Mitsuru documented the tormented discussion among 
the young officers aboard who questioned the meaning of their impending death for a war 
that was certain to end in defeat. Yoshida recounts the now infamous phrase of Captain 
Usubuchi desperately seeking meaning in dying for the nation, moments before the ship 
sank under relentless bombardment by 700 American jet fighters. His tormented words 
reveal how he thought his impending death may be a sacrifice that would serve as an 
awakening, a rallying cry for a better national future.  
“Japan has paid too little attention to progress. We have been too finicky, too 
wedded to selfish ethics; we have forgotten true progress. How else can Japan be es 
saved except by losing and coming to its senses? If Japan does not come to its sens
now, when will it be saved?  
“We will lead the way. We will die as harbingers of Japan's new life. That's where 
our real satisfaction lies, isn't it?"(Yoshida 1985, 40) 

 

296

 
What this twenty‐one year old officer meant by “progress” here is vague enough so 
that it is possible to draw different meanings like peace, justice, and prosperity. It is also 
easy to fault the logical contradiction of a young man claiming to contribute to a future that 
he will not experience. Yet this contradictory logic is at the heart of the fluid idea of linking 
progress to sacrifice which enables the collective belief that Japan would rebound and 
recover.  In Yoshida’s rendering, the courage and discipline of the men facing certain death 
are emphasized, without blame or resentment directed toward the state leadership that 
ordered the tactically dubious “special attack” mission with no fuel to return home. Instead, 
Yoshida’s account is a requiem for the dead, a tribute that facilitates and legitimates the 
idea that defeat was somehow a catalyst for progress. This story works as a popular tale 
because the protagonists hail from the Imperial Navy, the arm of the Japanese military on 
record for opposing the war against the United States. Far from being guilty war mongers, 
then, the protagonists are more readily cast as seekers of peace in war, and their stories are 
more easily framed in terms of opposition to militarism. This allows the narratives to align 
neatly with the search for innocence in these men who have committed no evil and died 
worthy deaths, preserved as part of national memory by subsequent generations. The 
protagonists are not killing machines but tragic heroes of a country going through a 
national catastrophe. The narrative conspicuously and studiously avoids blame, and 
refuses to assign responsibility for killing. Thus, critics have charged that the Yamato story 
all too eagerly seeks to banish evil and safeguard innocence, to mitigate accusations that 
the pro
tagonists were perpetrators of war (Fukuma 2007, 56). 
The nationalist appeal of this tale of “meaningful sacrifice” is obvious. The story of 
Yamato has been made into four films from 1953 to 2005, and has inspired numerous 

 

297

fictive accounts (e.g. popular manga series Spaceship Yamato, Zipang, etc). Usubuchi’s 
statement has been cited in language arts textbooks, and recounted in a variety of political 
speeches. As a patriotic symbol as popular as Paul Revere, 20,000 viewers of NHK 
television voted Usubuchi’s statement among the top five favorites in a popular program 
called That’s When History Changed (Sonotoki Rekishiga Ugoita) in 2007. Nevertheless, this 
wrenching tale of courage and hope never quite fulfills even those who survived the 
Yamato catastrophe like Yoshida, much less the veterans embittered by other cases of 
military ineffectiveness (Yoshida 1986, 2003a; Iida 2008). The patriotic narrative therefore 
does not easily convert into a new militaristic identity as critics fear, because Yoshida never 
leaves the confines of this immediate experience (Fukuma 2007).  
For today’s young audience watching the recent feature film on the Yamato tragedy 
of 60 years ago, the value of sacrificing one’s life for the nation is not plainly obvious. Thus, 
after the 2005 premiere, a high school student posed a question about the meaning in dying 
for the nation to the young actors who played the officers: 
o defend the country. 
Student: “It’s difficult for me to understand what it means t
What does it feel like? Is it scary?” 
Actor A: “Perhaps it’s normal that we can't understand it.” 
Actor B: “It’s becoming more and more difficult to imagine the relationship between 
the individual and the state. We’ve grown up at a time when we don’t know what 
that feels like. And it’s scary to die. I wondered how people could love the country so 
much”(Tôei Production 2005.)351 
 
With such new sensibilities, the “bedrock of peace” narrative has thus had to shift its 
meaning away from military valor. In the 2005 version, the officers do not emphasize that 
they are dying for the nation or the Emperor, but they do so more “to protect their family 
and loved ones.”  
351 My translation 

                                                 

 

298

 THE TRAGIC NARRATIVES ON THE RAVAGES OF WAR  
If progress is to be understood as the state of postwar prosperity without war in the 
ameliorative narrative, then the atonement has been completed and the war dead have 
already been rewarded for their sacrifice. But if progress is to be understood in the sense of 
world peace, such an ideal has not been achieved, so the dead have not been rewarded and 
mourning continues (Akazawa 2005, 160). In the latter tragic narrative, the war was an act 
of intentional aggression, carried out by a handful of ignorant and incompetent military 
leaders. In contrast to the ameliorative narratives, the tragic “ravages of war” narratives 
were born out of a profound skepticism about state‐defined “justice,” and the notion that 
people ultimately died in vain for an unnecessary war. Recognizing the state’s capacity for 
violence and immoral acts, this perspective profoundly questions the positive meaning of 
sacrifices (Akazawa 2005, 7‐8.) The following two cases represent examples of those 
narratives. 
 
One of the most influential figures to shape the postwar discourse is historian 
Ienaga Saburo, a prolific scholar of war history and war responsibility, and a well‐known 
plaintiff who waged the longest legal battle against the state over how to teach the national 
past. Motivated by a sense of remorse at having been a passive bystander during the war, 
Ienaga devoted himself to asserting the right to publish perpetrator history in school 
textbooks, staking the claim that the state had specific culpability and responsibility for the 
mistaken judgments and decisions regarding the entry into and conduct during the war 

Discourse on Perpetrator History: The Case of Ienaga Saburo 

 

299

Ienaga’s narrative of war is unmistakably that of perpetrator history. He 

(Nozaki 2008, 154). His three lawsuits over the course of 32 years claimed the right to 
freedom of speech, and challenged the constitutionality of the textbook certification system 
by the Ministry of Education which demanded extensive revisions for Ienaga’s textbooks. 
Importantly, the “speech” that he sought to protect in those lawsuits is the critical narrative 
of national history , especially the dark chapters of World War II, including the invasion of 
China, the rapes in China, the biological experiment Unit 731, the Nanjing Massacre, the 
civilian victimization in the Battle of Okinawa, and the forced labor of colonial subjects and 
POWs (Nozaki and Inokuchi 2000, 116).  
represented the viewpoint that the war was an illegal war of aggression in violation of 
international treaties, driven by Japan’s economic and political ambitions to control north 
China, and it culminated in a 15 year conflict, starting from the Manchurian incident in 
1931, the Marco Polo Incident in 1937, Pearl Harbor in 1941, the invasion of southeast and 
south Asia and the south Pacific, and ultimately ending in 1945.  He does not spare the 
state: “… the fifteen‐year war as an unrighteous, reckless war begun with unjust and 
improper goals and means by the Japanese state, and because starting the war and 
rthe state…” (Ienaga 2001, 148)352  
efusing to end the war in a timely fashion were both illegal and improper acts of 
 In turn, the Ministry certification officials sought changes in his draft texts 
countering that “Japan was not unilaterally bad,” “Do not write bad things about Japan,” 
“Eliminate the description that Japan caused suffering in China and Asia” (Nozaki 2008, 22). 
352 Original in “Jûgonen sensô ni yoru shi o dô kangaeru ka,” Rekishi tokuhon (expanded 
issue, March 1979); in Ienaga Saburô shû, vol 12, p.260); translated by Richard Minear in 
Japan's Past, Japan's Future: One Historian's Odyssey. London: Rowman and Littlefield. 
p.148 

                                                 

 

300

As these disputes were publicized over time, Ienaga’s lawsuits raised public awareness, and 
spurred citizens’ movements to support his ongoing efforts. A favorable verdict for his 
second lawsuit emboldened other history textbook writers to increase their coverage of 
perpetrator history in the 1970s and 1980s. Following a dispute with South Korea and 
China in 1982, the Cabinet Secretary of the Japanese government announced that it will 
promote a more diplomatically sensitive framework to depict war in history textbooks. By 
1993, another court challenge was underway by Takashima Nobuyoshi to continue the 
pressure on the state certification system that sought to reduce perpetrator narratives in 
textbooks (Aramaki 2003, 233; Takashima 2003). Beyond the education field, Ienaga’s 
public defiance inspired peace movements, NGOs and citizens forum that sought a new 
collective identity based on ideas of freedom, democracy, peace, and rights of citizens 
( 
Nohira 2003; Yoshioka 2008).  
Around the time when the second of Ienaga’s suits was underway at the height of 
the Vietnam War, another anti‐war citizen of the wartime generation began penning 
mortifying stories that would become one of the most iconic anti‐war literature in postwar 
Japan. Nakazawa Keiji’s semi‐autobiographical comic Barefoot Gen (1973‐87) offers a tragic 
narrative of the obliteration of Hiroshima, depicted as an intimate family portrayal of day‐
to‐day survival after the atomic bomb. Interweaving personal history and world history, it 
tells the horrific effects of the nuclear blast and radiation with unmistakable rage, agony, 
grief, and despair. The graphic details of the atomic blast are depicted to maximum effect: 
charred bodies, people with torn skin hanging from their faces and limbs, eyeballs dangling 

Discourse on Obliterated Hiroshima: the Case of Barefoot Gen 

 

301

from their sockets and maggots hatching on corpses, heaps of burned dead bodies in the 
river and elsewhere all over the scorched flattened city. The tragic plot and logic are 
straightforward. Gen’s father and sister died in the nuclear blast under the collapsed house, 
but Gen, his mother and brothers narrowly escaped. His mother was pregnant and gave 
birth to Gen’s sister on the day of the blast amid the wreckage. Thereafter, for ten volumes, 
Gen survives hunger and poverty, loss of his mother and sister, humiliation and fear, illness 
and discrimination, and exploitation (Morris‐Suzuki 2005, 160; Nakazawa 1994; 
Spiegel
n 1ma
994). 
In Gen, the indictment of war’s evil is unequivocal: the war was brought on 
recklessly and unnecessarily by the Japanese military and the Imperial state that 
heartlessly misled civilians to deathly destruction and suffering. All the suffering emanating 
from this disaster could have been prevented if only the war had been stopped earlier, if 
only the state had the sense to accept the Potsdam Declaration. Gen’s message is clear: 
authorities like the state, the military, the Emperor, the American military and American 
doctors are evil, and cannot be trusted (Dower 1999, 243‐4, 248‐9). Thus, even as the story 
progresses from obliteration to rebuilding life, it carries a bitter undertone, since nothing 
can really undo the permanent damage to people’s lives and their bodies, and the culprits 
are not brought to justice. Although the story ends when Gen is a preteen, readers may 
sense that the radiation disease that claimed his mother and sister, the last of his surviving 
biological family, may also eventually catch up with Gen himself.  
Widely used in schools and easily accessible, Gen is arguably the most influential 
and iconic war literature to reach successive postwar generations and shape popular 
consciousness in the past four decades. It is a vehicle for intergenerational transmission of 

 

302

anti‐war sentiments, and many attest to learning about Hiroshima first from Gen (Ito 2006, 
152).  It is available in all school libraries, shown in peace education class, broadcast in 
commercial television, and released in cinemas, It has been reprinted several times (1975, 
1988, 1998, 2000, and 2001) and has sold 5 million copies, and has been translated in 11 
languages (Fukuma 2006, 29). It has been made into an animation film, live action features, 
musical, and television broadcasts, the most recent of which shown as a two‐part live 
action story in Fuji television in summer 2007 and earned a high rating of 19.3% (Fuji TV 
2007). As a social equivalent of Anne Frank’s story that mobilizes empathy and anger, its 
reinforcement effect works over the generational cycle: people read Gen in manga, then re‐
encounter it later in anime, then again as an adult on TV, and then watch it with their own 
children. The generational transmission has now reached the point that grandparents 
report watching Gen with their grandchildren (Fuji TV 2007). The message is emphatic: We 
must take control of our own lives, have the strength to say no to war and nuclear weapons, 
so as to never become such victims again (Dower 1999; Nakazawa 1994).  
One of the most important ingredients for Gen’s enduring success is its ability to 
offer a clear alternative political identity in the father figure who serves as a spiritual 
backbone of the story, even though he dies at the beginning by the impact of the atomic 
bomb, crushed excruciatingly under the roof of his house. Gen’s principled father, the 
source of Gen’s strength, was a down‐to‐earth, clear thinking artist who saw the deception 
of the military and imperialist government for what it was, and was tortured for expressing 
his opposition to the war that brought nothing but suffering. Nakazawa was five when his 
own father was tortured for being critical of the war, and this greatly influenced his 
political views.  This father is the antithesis of the common postwar excuse of the wartime 

 

303

generation that “we were all deceived”. Gen’s father represents the possibilities of courage 
to fight, resist authority, and oppose the war (Napier 2001, 168).  
Although Barefoot Gen is influential in encouraging people to learn about the 
destructive power of nuclear weapons, it rarely takes a look at the victimization for the 
whole war in larger perspective. No connection is made between the bomb and the 15 year 
war that preceded the blast even though Hiroshima was a military city (Yoshida 2006). 
Because of the overwhelming demand on empathy, the young audience who watched the 
2007 television broadcast seem prevented from asking how the war came about, why the 
Americans did it, or why the Japanese military did not prevent it. Although they vow “never 
again,” they don’t say why or how (Fuji TV 2007). They gain no insight that much of 
invaded Asia welcomed the atomic bombs dropped on Japan at the time (Ônuma, 223), and 
tha
s a tale 
that it i
Hence, Gen can unite people through their suffering but cannot inspire hope and 
progress to attain a nuclear free world. There is no universal agreement about the evil of 
US decision to obliterate Hiroshima and Nagasaki to win the war. The perpetrators of this 
tragedy were never brought to justice, and never will be. There is no promise that the 
obliteration will never happen again in a world where nuclear arms have multiplied 
throughout the Cold War. Gen remains an indictment of the Japanese government in the 
guise of victim narrative (Ueno & Narita 1999), and thus sets a constraint on the 
universalization of the Hiroshima story. There is no enduring hope in the messages that can 
bring closure to the resolve to “never again” wage war. Absolute pacifism finds no 
redemption because no justice is forthcoming to punish the perpetrators, and without such 
justice the claim for peace and antimilitarism rings hollow.  

t Korean audiences rejected (Yamanaka 2006).  

 

304

 IDENTITY FORMATION AND PATHWAYS OF EMPATHY FOR THE “OTHER” 
In defeat cultures where perpetrators and victims can be often made up of the same 
people, questioning the legitimacy of what is right and wrong has led to some 
contemplation of the shades of gray. Recognizing the need to conceptualize the 
perpetrators and victims not as oppositions but as embodied in the same side, some 
scholars of war memory have sought to clarify the messy amorphous middle zone. Aleida 
Assmann (2006) for example has attempted to connect the mutually contradictory frames 
of suffering and guilt in German memory by conceptualizing a structure of hierarchy in the 
discourse. In explaining the current shift in German memory that posits the polarity 
between a memory of German guilt and a memory of German suffering, she posits that 
various levels of heterogeneous memory can exist side by side if they are contained within 
a normative frame of generally accepted validity. 
A search for a possible “empathetic” approach that still allows the postwar 
generations to condemn individual acts of perpetration for what they are, has been gaining 
some ground in World War II memory since the 2000s (LaCapra 2001).  It attempts to 
identify intersecting dimensions of perpetrator and victim in soldiers by integrating the 
understanding of individual biographies with the structural conditions that transform 
individuals into savage killers. This complex approach to remembering the past represents 
a trend toward identifying and embracing a ‘good‐and‐also‐evil’ narrative. In these 
narratives, authors locate and work through the experience of atrocious violence as itself a 
monumental trauma and in doing so, succeed in making accessible the mindset of the 
soldier‐as‐killing‐machine. They attempt to move beyond the good versus evil split by 

 

305

identifying the perpetrators as victims of military abuse, while, at the same time, 
condemning their actions as perpetrators. Looking for such connections and bridging 
contradictions requires disentangling distortions and finding ways of understanding 
complicated human action without being encumbered by the taboos that stifled dialogue in 
the past. These attempts can be seen as efforts to move beyond the impasse that is inherent 
in the defeat culture (Inoue 2005; Kurahashi 2002).  
Many more transnational wars have now been fought since World War II: the 
Korean War, the Vietnam War, the Afghan War, the Gulf War, the War in Kosovo, and now 
the Iraq War. With wars that caused escalating civilian casualties, and used technologies 
that were ever more potent and destructive, the narrative of war and peace is in need of 
rethinking and reformulation for the post‐Cold War 21st century. The distinction between 
the good war and the bad war is no longer clear‐cut; the heroes and villains are no longer 
simply apparent; the moral codes begin to blur from black and white to shades of gray. 
There are many instances that call for the understanding of the gray zone (Levi 2004): the 
Jewish kapos who cooperated with the Nazis in concentration camps during the Holocaust, 
the Soviet liberators who raped scores of German women in the Third Reich’s capital, 
American soldiers who destroyed whole villages with Vietnamese civilians, and today Iraqi 
prisoners detained and tortured in Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo. In these proliferating gray 
zones, the construction of moral frameworks of war is becoming more and more tenuous.  
If the social construction of a moral framework is based fundamentally on our ability to 
code the distinction between good and bad legitimately, it is the very legitimacy of those 
codes that is then called in question (Alexander 2003). 

 

306

Given the proclivity of most people in the gray zone to see themselves as victims 
rather than perpetrators, and the tendency for most people to favor the interests of close 
relations with family and friends rather than empathize with abstract, distant victims, 
perhaps it is not surprising that the Japanese approaches– using both ameliorative and 
tragic narratives – did not shift the cognitive map from particularistic understandings of 
the war to a more universalistic picture at least until the 1980s.  One approach to make 
such a shift might be to redefine the meaning of “progress” as Giesen (2004, 145) suggests, 
so that a new pattern of identity making that is not based on the horror of the past will 
become more attractive. In contemplating broader pathways of empathy for the new 
century, some psychologists’ insights that those with higher national identification have 
lower sense of collective guilt for immoral historical events are useful (Doosje et al. 2004, 
108). Constructing post‐national collective understandings of the self that is identified with 
a supra‐national community would call for a certain level of de‐japanization of the 
Japanese, just as the construction of European identity required a certain level of de‐
germanization of Germans.  In other words, a cosmopolitan national identity is the only 
way to unbloc
 
 
References: 
Akazawa, Shiro. 2005. Yasu
e. Tokyo: 
Iwanami shoten. 
Alexander, Jeffrey C. 2003. The meanings of social life: a cultur
al sociology. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
—. 2004. "Toward a Theory of Cultural Trauma." Pp. 1‐30 in Cultural trauma and collective 
identity, edited by Jeffrey C. Alexander, Ron Eyerman, Bernhard Giesen, Neil Sme
lser, 
and Piotr Sztompka. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Alexander, Jeffrey C., Ron Eyerman, Bernhard Giesen, Neil Smelser, and Piotr Sztompka 
(Eds.). 2004. Cultural trauma and collective identity. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 

k the pathway of empathy for the suffering of Asian victims.  

kuni jinja: Semegiau 'senbotsusa tsuitô' no yuku

 

307

Anderson, Benedict. (1983) 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and 
Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso. 
Aramaki, Shigeto. 2003. "Jiyû, Heiwa, Minshushugi o motomete: musubini kaete " Pp. 233‐
240 in Ienaga Saburô no nokoshita mono hikitsugu mono, edited by Takashi Ô
ta, 
Hiroshi Oyama, and Keiji Nagahara. Tokyo Nihon Hyôronsha  
fering in Germ
Assmann, Aleida. 2006. "On the (In)Compatibility of Guilt and Suf
an 
Memory." Journal: German Life & Letters 59:187‐200. 
Rahimi, Babak. 2005. "Sacrifice, Transcendence and the Soldier." Peace Review 17:1‐8. 
Doosje, Bertjan, Nyla B. Branscombe, Russell Spears, and Antony Manstead. 2004. 
"Consequences of national ingroup identification for responses to immoral historical 
11 in Collective guilt : international perspective, edited by Nyla B. 
events." Pp. 95‐1
Branscombe and
 Bertjan Doosje. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univers
ity Press. 
 Dower, John W. 1999. Embracing Defeat: Japan in the Wake of World War II. New York: 
W.W. Norton. 
Eyerman, Ron. 2004. "Cultural Trauma:  Slavery and the Formation of African American 
Identity." Pp. 60‐111 in Cultural trauma and collective identit
y, edited by Jeffrey C. 
Alexander. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Fuji Television. 2007. "Hadashi no Gen: Bangumi messeeji." Tokyo. 
http://www.fujitv.co.jp/gen/message_yomu.html  Accessed 1/28/08 
Fukuma, Yoshiaki. 2006. ""Genbaku manga" no mediashi." Pp. 10‐58 in "Hadashi no Gen" ga 
fûkei: manga, sensô, kioku, edited by Kazuma Yoshimura and Yoshiaki Fukuma. 
ita Matsudo‐shi: Azusa Shuppansha. 
—.  2007. Junkoku to hangyaku : "tokkô" no katari no sengoshi. Tokyo: Seikyûsha  
Giesen, Bernhard. 2004. "The Trauma of Perpetrators: The Holocaust as the Traumatic 
Reference of German National Identity." Pp. 112‐154 in Cultural trauma and 
collective identity, edited by Jeffrey C. Alexander, Ro
n Eyerman, Bernhard Gi
esen, 
Neil Smelser, and Piotr Sztompka. Berkeley: University of Ca
lifornia Press. 
e Past in the Present." Pp. 64‐95 in Postwar Japan as History, edited 
Gluck, Carol. 1993. "Th
by Andrew Gordon. Berkeley: University o
f California Press. 
Ienaga, Sa
burô. 1978. The Pacific War, 1931
ooks. 
rld War II. New York: Pantheon B
anami Shoten. 
 [War Responsibility]. Tokyo: Iw
—. 1985. Sensô sekinin
—. 1986. Taiheiyô sensô [The Pacific War, 1931­1945]. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten. 
Ienaga, Saburo. 2001. Japa
n's Past, Japan's Future: One Historian's Odyssey. London: 
Rowman and Littlefield. Translated by Richard Min
ear. 
2000. Bodies of Memory: Narratives of War in
Igarashi, Yoshikuni. 
iversity Press. 
1945­1970. Pr
inceton: Princeton Un
Iida, Susumu. 2008. Jigokuno nihonhei: nyûginia sensen no shinsô. Tokyo: Shinchôsha. 
Inoue, Toshio. 2005. Hajimete hito o korosu. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten. 
Ito, Yu. 2006. ""Hadashi no Gen" no minzokushi: Gakkô o meguru manga taiken no shosô." 
adashi no Gen" ga ita fûkei: manga, sensô, kioku, edited by Kazuma 
Pp. 147‐181 in "H
atsudo‐shi: Azusa Shuppansha. 
Yoshimura and Yoshiaki Fukuma. M
Kurahashi, Ayako. 2002. K
mitsumeru tabi. Tok
yo: K*obunken. 
LaCapra, Dominick. 2001. Writing History, Writing Trauma. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 

enpei datta chichino nokoshitamono:Oyako

 nidai, kokorono kizuo 

­1945: A Critical Perspecti

ve on Japan's Role in 

Wo

 Postwar Japanese Cu

lture, 

 

308

 defeat in the mod

ern 

Gen e no te
 Gen"

 Contemporary 

 within Us: Media, Memo

 and memory : cultural histories of military

Levi, Primo. 2004. "The
 Gray Zone." Pp. 83‐90 in Violence in war and peace, edited by Nancy 
well Pub. 
Scheper‐Hughes and Philippe I. Bourgois. Malden, MA: Black
Macleod, Jenny. 2008. Defeat
 [Eng
era. Basingstoke
land] ; New York: Palgrave Macm
illan. 
Morris‐Suzuki, Tessa. 2005. The Past
ry, History. London: Vers
o. 
Moses, A. Dirk. 2007a. German intellectuals and the Nazi past. Cambridge; New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
The Non‐German German and the German German: Dile
Moses, A. Dirk. 2007b. "
mmas of 
Identity after the Holocau
st." New German Critique 101:45‐94. 
Mosse, George L. 1990. Fallen Soldiers: Reshaping the Memory of the World Wars. New York: 
Oxford University Press. nnosei to media2 Sengo 60ne
n Asahi Mainichi Yom
iuri sanshi ni 
Nakano, Masashi. 2005. "Te
ort 18
miru hachigatsu juugonichi shasetsu no kensho." Asahi Sôken Repôbun
3:19‐48. 
Nakazawa
, Keiji. 1982‐87. Hadas
sha. 
hi no Gen [Barefoot Gen]. Tokyo: Ch
gami. Tokyo: Kyôikushiryô shuppan
kai. 
—. 1991. Hadashi no 
 jiden. Tokyo: Kyôikus
—. 1994. "Hadashi no
hiryô shuppankai. 
Napier, Susan. 2001. Anime from Akira to Princess Mononoke: Experiencing
Japanese Animation. New York: Palgrave. 
Nohira, Shinsaku. 2003. "Piisubôto no funatabi o tôshite." Pp. 229‐231 in Ienaga Saburô no 
nokoshita mono hikitsugu mono, edited by Takashi Ôta, Hiroshi Oyama, and Keiji
 
Nagahara. Tokyo Nihon Hyôronsha  
Nozaki, Yoshiko, and Hiromitsu Inokuchi. 2000. "Japanese Education, Nationalism, and 
Ienaga Saburo's Textbook Lawsuits." Pp. 96‐126 in Censoring History: Citizenship 
pan, Germany, and the United States, edited by Laura Hein and Mark 
Selden. Armonk,
 NY: M.E. Sharpe. 
Nozaki, Yoshiko. 2008. War memory, nationalism and education in post­war Japan, 1945­
challenges. London ; New
 York: Routledge. 
Ônuma, Yasuaki. 2007. Tokyo Saiban, sensô sekini
n, sengo sekinin. Tokyo: Tôshindô. 
Schivelbusch, Wolfg
ang. 2003. The Culture of Defeat: On National Trauma, Mour
Recovery. New York: Metrop
olitan Books. 
Smith, Philip. 2005. Why war? : The cultural logic of Iraq, the Gulf War, and
 Suez. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Spiegelman, Art. 1994. "Forward: Comics after the Bomb." Pp. v‐viii in Barefoot Gen 4: Out 
iroshima>, edited by 
Keiji Nakazawa. Philadelphia: 
New Society Publishers. 
Takahashi, Tetsuya. 2005. Kokka to gisei. Tokyo: NHK Books. 
Takashima, Nobuyoshi. 2003. "Ienaga kyôkasho saiban o hikitsugu takashima kyôkasho 
saiban." Pp. 122‐128 in Ienaga Saburô no nokoshita mono hikitsugu mono, ed
ited by 
Takashi Ôta, Hiroshi Oyama, and Keiji Nagahara. Tokyo Nihon Hyôronsha  
Tôei Production. 2005. "Eiga 'Otokotachi no Yamato' kranku appu kaiken." Tokyo. 
http://odoroku.tv/vod/0000005FE/512.html   accessed 7/27/08 
Ueno, Chizuko, Minato Kawamura, and Ryûichi Narita. 1999. "Sensô wa dono yô ni 
katararete kita ka." Pp. 17‐54 in Sensô wa dono yô ni katararete kita ka, edited by 
Minato Kawamura, et. al. Tokyo: Asahi Shinbunsha. 

se history textbook controversy and Ienag

of the Ashes <A Cart

oon Story of H

and Memory in Ja

2007 : the Japane

a Saburo's court 

ning, and 

 

309

manga, sensô, kiok

Weinberg, Gerhard L. 2005. A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II. New Yor
k: 
Cambridge University Press. 2nd edition. 
Yamanaka, Chie. 2006. "Yomare enai ‘taiken’, ekkyô dekinai ‘kioku’: Kankoku ni okeru 
‘Hadashi no gen’ no juyô o megutte." Pp. 211‐245 in "Hadashi no Gen" ga ita fûkei: 
u, edited by Kazuma Yoshimura and Yoshiaki Fukuma. Matsudo‐
shi: 
Azusa Shuppan
sha. 
Yomiuri Shinbun. 2006a. Kenshô: Sensô Sekinin I. Tokyo: Chûôkôronshinsha
. 
—. 2006b. Kenshô: Sensô Sekinin II. Tokyo: Chûôkôronshinsha. 
Yoshida, Koji. 2006. "‘Hadashi no gen’ o yomitoku shiten: Higai to kagai no 
puroburematiiku." Pp. 294‐298 in "Hadashi no Gen" ga ita fûkei: manga, sensô, kioku, 
edited by Kazuma
 Yoshimura and Yoshiaki Fuku
ma. Matsudo‐shi: Azusa 
Shuppansha. 
f Washington 
Yoshida, Mitsuru. 1985. Requiem for Bat
tleship Yamato. Seattle: University o
Press. Translated by Richard Min
ear 
—. 1986. "Sanka no sedai." Pp. 32‐45 in Yoshida M
: gekan. Tokyo: B
ungei 
shunjû. 
no s
kan Yamato. Tokyo: Kadokawa 
—. 2003a. "Ichi heishi 
ekinin." Pp. 166‐184 in Sen
shoten. 
—. 2003b. Senkan Yamato. Tokyo: Kadokawa shoten. 
Yoshimura, Kazuma, and Yoshiaki Fukuma. 2006. "Hadashi no Gen" ga ita fûkei : manga, 
sensô, kioku. Matsudo‐shi: Azusa Shuppansha. 
Yoshioka, Tatsuya. 2008. "Experience, Action, and the Floating Peace Village." Pp. 317‐322 
in Another Japan is Possible: New Social Movements and Global Citizenship E
ducation, 
edited by Jennifer Chan. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Yui, Daizaburo. 2005. "Sekai sensô no nakano ajia‐taiheiyô sensô." Pp. 235‐274 in Ajia­
Taiheiyô Sensô 1: Naze, ima ajia­taiheiyôsensô ka, edited by Ryûichi Narita et al. 
Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten. 
 

itsuru choasku shû

 

 

310

